CANTO I

THE MARRIAGES OF SALME AND LINDA


In ancient days, the race of Taara dwelt here and there in the land, and
took to themselves wives of the daughters of men.[10] In the far North,
near the sacred oak forest of Taara, such a household existed, and from
thence three sons went forth into the world to seek their fortunes. One
son travelled to Russia, where he became a great merchant; another
journeyed to Lapland, and became a warrior; while the third, the famous
Kalev,[11] the father of heroes, was borne to Esthonia on the back of an
eagle.[12] The eagle flew with him to the south across the Gulf of
Finland, and then eastward across Lääne[13] and Viru,[14] until, by the
wise ordering of Jumala,[15] the eagle finally descended with him on
the rocky shores of Viru, where he founded a kingdom.

In the province of Lääne a young widow lived quietly by herself. One
Sunday she followed the footprints of her cattle, and what did she find
on her way? On the path she found a hen; she found a grouse's egg in the
footprints of the cattle, and she found a young crow near the village.
She carried them all home with her to comfort her loneliness, and she
made a nest for the hen and the egg in a basket lined with wool, but she
threw the young crow into a corner behind the boxes.

The hen soon began to grow, and her head reached the lid of the basket
while she sat on the egg. She grew taller for three months, and for
several days of the fourth month.

The widow went into the storehouse to look at her foster-children, and
what did she behold on raising the lid of the basket? The hen had grown
into the fair maiden Salme;[16] the egg had given birth to a second
maiden, Linda, while the poor crow had become an orphan girl, a
maid-of-all-work, to carry wood to the stove and to bend under the
weight of water-pails from the well.

Salme was besieged by suitors. Five and six brought her offerings of
corn-brandy, seven sent her offers of marriage, and eight sent
trustworthy messengers to bring them news of her. The fame of her beauty
spread far and wide, and at length not merely mortal lovers, but even
the Moon, the Sun,[17] and the eldest son of the Pole Star sought her
hand in marriage.

The Moon drove up in a grand chariot drawn by fifty horses, and attended
by a train of sixty grooms. He was a pale slender youth, and found no
favour in the eyes of Salme, who cried out from the storehouse:

    "Him I will not have for husband,
    And the night-illumer love not.
    Far too varied are his duties,
    And his work is much too heavy.
    Sometimes he must shine in heaven
    Ere the day, or late in evening;
    Sometimes when the sun is rising;
    Sometimes he must toil at morning,
    Ere the day has fully broken;
    Sometimes watches in the daytime,
    Lingering in the sky till mid-day."

When the Moon heard her answer, he grew yet paler, and returned home
sorrowful.

And now the Sun himself appeared, a young man with fiery eyes; and he
drove up with similar state to the Moon. But Salme declared that she
liked him even less than the Moon, for he was much too fickle.
Sometimes, during the finest summer weather, he would send rain in the
midst of the hay-harvest; or if the time had come for sowing oats, he
would parch the land with drought; or if the time for sowing is past, he
dries up the barley in the ground, beats down the flax, and presses down
the peas in the furrows; he won't let the buckwheat grow, or the lentils
in their pods; and when the rye is white for harvest, he either glows
fiercely and drives away the clouds, or sends a pouring rain.

The Sun was deeply offended; his eyes glowed with anger, and he departed
in a rage.

At last the Youth of the Stars made his appearance, driving with a
similar cortège to those who had preceded him.

As soon as Salme heard of his arrival, she cried out that his horse was
to be led into the stable and tended with the utmost care. The horse
must have the best provender, and must be given fine linen to rest on
and be covered with silken cloths; his head was to rest on satin, and
his hoofs on soft hay. After this she declared to his master:

    "Him I will accept as lover,
    Give the Star my hand in marriage,
    And will prove his faithful consort.
    Gently shine his eyes of starlight,
    And his temper alters nothing.
    Never can he thwart the sowing,
    Never will destroy the harvest."

Having thus accepted her suitor and provided for the comfort of his
horse, Salme ordered the bridegroom to be ushered into the hall, where
the broad table was washed clean and covered with a new tablecloth. The
Star was to be seated with his back to the wall and his feet comfortably
propped up on the bench, while he was to be feasted on the best meat
and fish, and offered wedding-cake and honey, besides beer and sweet
mead. The widow invited the Star to take his place at the table, and
pressed him to eat and drink, but he was greatly excited, and his
weapons, ornaments, and heavy spurs jingled and clanked as he stamped on
the floor, and declared that he would eat nothing till Salme herself
appeared before him. But Salme asked him to wait awhile while she
adorned herself, and asked her sister Linda to fetch her woollen dress
and her silken shift with gold-embroidered sleeves, her stockings with
the pretty garters, and the brightly coloured and gold-worked kerchiefs
of silk and linen.

Meantime, the widow again invited the Star to eat and drink, or, if he
were tired, to sleep; but he declared, as before, that he would neither
eat nor drink till he had seen Salme, and that the stars never closed
their eyes in sleep.

At last Salme herself appeared in the hall, but the Meadow-Queen[18] and
the wood nymphs had so adorned her that her foster-mother did not know
her again, and asked in astonishment, "Is it the moon,[19] or the sun,
or one of the young daughters of the sunset?"

Guests gathered to the wedding from far and near, and even the oaks and
alders came, roots, branches, and all.

    After this they danced the cross-dance,[20]
    Waltzed the waltzes of Esthonia,
    And they danced the Arju[21] dances,
    And the dances of the West Land;
    And they danced upon the gravel,
    And they trampled all the greensward.
    Starry youth and maiden Salme,
    Thus their nuptials held in rapture.

In the midst of these joyous festivities, the Moon and then the Sun
returned in greater state than before to seek the hand of Linda, who was
resting on a couch in the bathroom; but she also refused them both,
almost in the same terms as her sister had done; and they retired
sorrowfully.

A third suitor, the Lord of the Waters, now appeared; but Linda replied
that the roaring of the waves was terrible, and the depth of the sea was
awful; that the brooks only gave a scanty supply of water, and the
river-floods were devastating. He was followed by the Wind, who rode the
Horse of the Tempest, and, like all the other suitors, was attended by a
cavalcade of fifty horses and sixty grooms; and he too asked the hand of
Linda. But she replied that a delicate girl could never take pleasure in
the howling of the wind and the raging of the tempest. The Wind whistled
out of the house, but his trouble did not weigh on his heart very long.

Another suitor for the hand of Linda now appeared in the person of the
Prince of Kungla.[22] All the guests, and Linda's own sisters, approved
of this suitor. But Linda declared that she could not think of
accepting him; for the king, his father, had wicked daughters, who would
treat a stranger unkindly.

A sixth suitor now appeared in the person of the young and handsome
giant Kalev. All the wedding-guests grumbled, and even the widow was
opposed to the match; but he pleased Linda, and she accepted him at
once. The widow then invited him to enter and partake of the good cheer;
but he trembled with eagerness, so that his sword in its sheath, and his
chains and spurs, and even the money in his purse, jingled as he
answered that he would neither eat nor drink till Linda appeared before
him. Linda begged for a little delay to adorn herself, but Kalev still
refused to eat or drink, and then she called her slave-sister to help
her, while the widow continued her ineffectual invitations to Kalev to
feast and enjoy himself.

At last Linda appeared in the hall, where she excited as much admiration
as her sister, and her wedding was celebrated with still greater
festivities than Salme's, the guests dancing the local dances of every
province of Esthonia.

But now the Youth of the Stars could delay no longer, and Salme took an
affecting farewell of her foster-mother and all her kith and kin,
declaring that she would now be hidden behind the clouds, or wandering
through the heavens transformed into a star. Then she mounted her
sledge, and again bade her foster-mother a last and eternal farewell.
Linda and her slave-sister called after her to ask whither she was
going; but there came no answer save the sighing of the wind, and tears
of joy and regret in the rain and the dew; nor did they ever receive
tidings of Salme more.

After Salme's departure, the wedding-festival of Linda was kept up for
some time, and when Kalev finally drove off with her in her sledge, she
bade farewell to her foster-mother; but Kalev reminded her that she had
forgotten the moon before the house, who was her father; the sun before
the storehouse, who was her old uncle; and the birch-tree before the
window, who was her brother, besides her cousins in the wood. They gazed
after her sorrowfully; but she was happy with Kalev, and heeded them
not. Kalev and Linda drove on in their sledge day and night across the
snow-fields and through the pine-forests till they reached their home.

[Footnote 10: If this is a Scriptural allusion, it is almost the only
one in the book. The _Kalevipoeg_ is essentially a pre-Christian poem,
and nowhere exhibits the curious mixture of pre-Christian and Christian
ideas that we meet with in many parts of the Kalevala, and notably in
Runo 50.]

[Footnote 11: In the _Kalevala_ (= the country of Kaleva), the hero
himself does not appear in person, though we constantly read of his sons
and daughters. Some critics, however, identify him with the dead giant,
Antero Vipunen, in Runo 17 of the _Kalevala_.]

[Footnote 12: The eagle of the North plays a conspicuous part in Finnish
and Esthonian literature. It is this bird for whose resting-place
Väinämöinen spares the birch-tree, and which afterwards rescues him from
the waves and carries him to Pohjola. In several cosmogonic ballads,
too, it is the eggs of this bird and not of the blue duck which
contribute to the formation of the world: for the Mundane Egg plays a
part here as well as in other cosmogonies. The passage in the
_Kalevipoeg_, to which this note refers, corresponds almost exactly to
one in the _Kalevala_ (xxx. 1-10), which ushers in the adventures of
Kullervo.]

[Footnote 13: A province in Western Esthonia, called Wiek by the
Germans.]

[Footnote 14: Esthonia proper; specially applied to the north-eastern
province.]

[Footnote 15: God: this word is applied to the Christian God in
Esthonia, Finland, and Lapland, as well as to the local divinities.]

[Footnote 16: There are many tales and ballads about the miraculous
birth and wooing of Salme and Linda. (Compare Neus, _Ehstnische
Volkslieder_, p. 9; Latham's _Nationalities of Europe_, i. p. 142.) In
the story of the "Milky Way," which commences Part II. of this volume,
Linda is represented as the daughter of Uko, and the queen of the birds.
We also read of a blue bird, Siuru, the daughter of Taara, in the
ballads. The name Linda or Lindu is evidently derived from the word
_Lind_, a bird.]

[Footnote 17: The Sun and Moon are both male deities in Finnish and
Esthonian. In the _Kalevala_ (Runo 11) the sun, moon, and a star seek
the hand of Kyllikki, the fair maid of Saari, for their sons, but she
rejects them all as unceremoniously as Salme. In the _Kanteletar_ (iii.
6), a maiden called Suometar (= Finland's daughter) plays a similar
part. Suometar is born from a duck's egg, found by a young girl named
Katrina.]

[Footnote 18: _Muru eit_, the meadow-queen (literally grass-mother), is
regarded as one of the tutelary divinities of the house. Esthonian
houses generally stand in a _grass field_, entered by a gate. Within the
enclosure are the storehouses, cattle-pens, and other outbuildings.]

[Footnote 19: This is somewhat inconsistent with the rather undignified
appearance of the Sun and Moon in person a little while before.]

[Footnote 20: The cross-dance is still danced in out-of-the-way parts of
the country; it is a kind of quadrille. Four couples station themselves
in such a manner as to form a cross. The opposite pairs advance and
retire several times, and then they dance round, when the second pairs
dance in the same manner, and another dance round follows, till they
have danced enough. The dance is accompanied with a song, in which the
dancers, and sometimes the bystanders, join.]

[Footnote 21: Arju or Harju (German, Harrien) one of the provinces of
Esthonia.]

[Footnote 22: Kungla is described as a country of untold wealth and the
land of adventures--a kind of fairyland. It appears, however, to have
been a real country, separated from Esthonia by sea, of which fabulous
tales were told. Some writers identify it with the Government of Perm;
but this is improbable, as it is generally described as an island.
Others think that the island of Gottland is meant.]




CANTO II

THE DEATH OF KALEV


Kalev and Linda lived very happily together, and were blessed with a
numerous offspring;[23] but the country was small, and as soon as the
children were grown up they wandered forth into the world to seek their
fortunes, more especially as Kalev had determined that one son only
should be the heir to his possessions. At length Kalev began to grow
old, and felt that his end was approaching. Two of his younger sons, who
were still little boys, remained at home; but the youngest of all, the
famous Sohni, more often known by his patronymic, the Son of Kalev, was
still unborn. Kalev foretold the glory and greatness of this last son to
Linda, indicating him as his heir,[24] and shortly afterwards fell
dangerously sick.

Then Linda took her brooch, and spun it round on a thread, while she
sent forth the Alder-Beetle[25] to bid the Wind-Magician and Soothsayer
hasten to the bedside of her husband. Seven days the brooch spun round,
and seven days the beetle flew to the north, across three kingdoms and
more, till he encountered the Moon, and besought his aid. But the Moon
only gazed on him sorrowfully without speaking, and went on his way.

Again Linda spun the brooch for seven days, and sent forth the beetle,
who flew farther this time, through many thick forests, and as far as
the Gold Mountain, till he encountered the Evening Star; but he also
refused him an answer.

Next time the beetle took a different route, over wide heaths and thick
fir-woods, till he reached the Gold Mountain, and met the rising Sun. He
also returned no answer; but on a fourth journey the beetle encountered
the Wind-Magician, the old Soothsayer from Finland,[26] and the great
Necromancer himself. He besought their aid, but they replied with one
voice that what the drought had parched up, the moonlight blanched, and
the stars withered, could never bloom again. And before the beetle
returned from his fruitless journey the mighty Kalev had expired.

Linda sat weeping by his bedside without food or sleep for seven days
and nights, and then began to prepare his corpse for burial. First she
bathed it with her tears, then with salt water from the sea, rain water
from the clouds, and lastly water from the spring. Then she smoothed his
hair with her fingers, and brushed it with a silver brush, and combed it
with the golden comb which the water-nymphs had used to comb their hair.
She drew on him a silken shirt, a satin shroud, and a robe over it,
confined by a silver girdle. She herself dug his grave thirty ells
below the sod, and grass and flowers soon sprang from it.

    From the grave the grasses sprouted,
    And the herbage from the hillock;
    From the dead man dewy grasses,
    From his cheeks grew ruddy flowers,
    From his eyes there sprang the harebells,
    Golden flowerets from his eyelids.[27]

Linda mourned for Kalev for one month after another till three months
had passed, and the fourth was far advanced. She heaped a cairn of
stones over his tomb, which formed the hill on which the Cathedral of
Revel now stands. One day she was carrying a great stone to the cairn,
but found herself too weak, and let it fall. She sat down on it, and
lamented her sad fate, and her tears formed the lake called "Ülemiste
järv," the Upper Lake, beside which the huge stone block may still be
seen.[28]

After this, Linda felt her time approaching, and she retired to the
bathroom,[29] and called upon the gods to aid her. Ukko and
Rõugutaja[30] both attended at her call, and one brought a bundle of
straw, and the other pillows, and they made her up a soft bed; nor was
it long before Kalev's posthumous son saw the light.

Linda was sitting by the cradle one day, trying to sing the child to
sleep, when suddenly he began to scream, and continued to scream day and
night for a whole month, when he burst his swaddling-clothes, smashed
the cradle to pieces, and began to creep about the floor.[31]

Linda suckled the child till he was three years old, and he grew up a
fine strong boy. He first learned to tend the cattle, and then to guide
the plough, and grew up like a young oak-tree. When he played _kurni_
(tipcat), his blocks flew far and wide all over the country, and many
even as far as the sea. Sometimes he used to go down to the sea, and
make ducks and drakes of huge rocks, which he sent spinning out to sea
for a verst or more, while he stood on his head to watch them.

At other times he used to amuse himself quietly in the enclosure,
carving skates or weaving baskets. Thus he passed his days till he came
to man's estate.

After the death of Kalev, Linda was much pestered by suitors who were
anxious to marry the rich widow; but she refused them all, and at length
they ceased to trouble her. Last of all came a mighty wind-sorcerer from
Finland, calling himself Kalev's cousin; and when she refused him also,
he vowed revenge. But she laughed at his threats, telling him she had
three young eagles with sharp claws growing up in the house, who would
protect their mother.

Linda was no longer tormented by suitors, but the magician whom she had
discarded recommended all his friends not to seek a wife in Kalev's
house, for notwithstanding Linda's wealth her beauty was faded, her
teeth were iron, and her words were red-hot pincers. They would do
better to sail to Finland, where they would find rows of maidens, rich
in money, pearls, jewels, and golden bracelets, waiting for them on the
rocky coast.

[Footnote 23: According to various traditions, Kalev and Linda are said
to have had seven or twelve sons.]

[Footnote 24: This is what Jacobs calls "junior right;" the patriarchal
custom of the elder children going forth into the world to seek their
fortunes, and the youngest remaining at home to look after his parents
and inherit their possessions. Hence the rivalry between Esau and
Jacob.]

[Footnote 25: Has this anything to do with boys spinning cockchafers on
a thread? The beetle alluded to in the text is said to be the ladybird,
but the ladybird has no particular connection with the alder. When a
brooch is thus spun on a thread, a question is asked, and if the motion
stops, the answer is unfavourable, but favourable if it continues. The
flight of the beetle is fortunate towards the south, but unfortunate
towards the north.]

[Footnote 26: It is curious that the Esthonians always regarded the
Finns, and the Finns the Lapps, as great sorcerers; each nation
attributing special skill in magic to those living north of
themselves.--But there is a Finnish ballad (_Kanteletar_, iii. 2) in
which we read of the sun and moon being stolen by German and Esthonian
sorcerers.]

[Footnote 27: This reminds us of Ariel's well-known song--

    "Full fathom five thy father lies,
    Of his bones are coral made," &c.
]

[Footnote 28: The origin of stone blocks is usually ascribed to
non-human beings in many countries, but most frequently to the devil,
especially in Northern Europe. Compare also the church-stories, &c., in
a later part of this work.]

[Footnote 29: The usual place employed on such occasions in Finland and
Esthonia.]

[Footnote 30: Ukko or Taara commonly appears as the principal god of the
Finns and Esthonians; Rõugutaja usually as an accoucheur, but
occasionally also as a malicious demon. Rõugutaja is also called the God
of the Wind. Other authorities consider him a water-god. (Kreutzwald und
Neus, _Mythische und Magische Lieder_, p. 108.)]

[Footnote 31: Kullervo in the _Kalevala_ (Runo 30) bursts his
swaddling-clothes and smashes his cradle in the same way.]




CANTO III

THE FATE OF LINDA


One hot day, the youngest son of Kalev was sitting on the top of a cliff
watching the clouds and waves. Suddenly the sky became overcast, and a
terrific storm arose, which lashed the breakers into foam. Äike,[32] the
Thunder-God, was driving his brazen-wheeled chariot over the iron
bridges of the sky, and as he thundered above, the sparks flew from the
wheels, and he hurled down flash after flash of lightning from his
strong right hand against a company of wicked demons of the air, who
plunged from the rocks into the sea, dodged the thunderbolts among the
waves, and mocked and insulted the god. The hero was enraged at their
audacity, and plunging into the water, dragged them from their
hiding-places like crabs, and filled a whole sack with them. He then
swam to the shore, and cast them out on the rocks, where the bolts of
the angry god soon reduced them to a disgusting mass that even the
wolves would not touch.

Another day, the three sons of Kalev went hunting in the forest with
their three dogs.[33] The dogs killed a bear among the bushes, an elk in
the open country, and a wild ox in the fir-wood. Next they encountered a
pack of wolves and another of foxes, numbering five dozen of each, and
killed them all. All this game the youngest brother bound together and
carried on his back; and on the way home they found the rye-fields full
of hares, of which they likewise secured five dozen.[34]

Meantime the Finnish sorcerer had been watching Kalev's house from his
boat, where he remained in hiding among the rocks a little way from the
shore, till he saw that the three young heroes had left the house and
wandered far into the forest, leaving their home unprotected. The
sorcerer then steered boldly to the shore, hid his boat, and made his
way by devious and unfrequented paths to the house of Kalev, where he
climbed over the low gate into the enclosure, and went to the door, but
he looked cautiously round when he reached the threshold. Linda was just
boiling soup over the fire when he rushed in, and, without saying a
word, seized her by the girdle and dragged her away to his boat. She
resisted him with tooth and nail, but he muttered spells which unnerved
her strength and overpowered her feeble efforts, and her prayers and
cries for help were unheard by men. But she cried to the gods for
protection, and the Thunder-God himself came to her aid.

Just as the sorcerer was about to push off from the shore, Pikker darted
a bolt from the clouds. His chariot thundered over the iron bridges of
the sky, scattering flames around it, and the sorcerer was struck down
senseless. Linda fled; but the gods spared her further sorrow and
outrage by transforming her into a rock on Mount Iru.

It was a long time before the sorcerer woke from his swoon, when he sat
up, rubbing his eyes, and wondering what had become of his prey; but he
could discover no trace of her. The rock is now called "Iru's
Stepmother;" and old people relate that when it was once rolled down
into the valley, it was found next morning in its original place on the
mountain.

The sons of Kalev were now making the best of their way home, sometimes
along well-trodden paths or across the plains, sometimes wading through
deep sand or mossy bogs, and then through forests of pine, oak, birch,
and alder. The pine forest was called the King's Wood; the oak forest
was sacred to the God Taara; the forest where the slender birch-trees
grew was called the Maidens' Wood, and the alder-wood was sacred to
mourners, and was called the Wood of the Poor Orphans.

As they passed through the pine forest which was called the King's Wood,
the eldest brother sat down under a tree and began to sing a song. He
sang till the leaves on the trees shone brighter than ever, and the
needles on the fir-trees turned to silken tassels, and the fir-cones
gleamed purple in the sunshine. Acorns sprouted on the oaks, tender
catkins on the birch-trees, and other trees were covered with
sweet-scented snow-white flowers, which shone in the sunshine and
glimmered in the moonlight, while the woods re-echoed with his singing,
and the tones were heard far over the heaths and meadows, and the
daughter of the king of Kungla wept tears of rapture.[35]

The second brother sat down in the birch-wood under a weeping
birch-tree, and began to sing a song. As he sang, the buds unfolded and
the flowers bloomed, the golden ears of corn swelled, and the apples
reddened, the kernels formed in the nuts, the cherries ripened, red
berries grew on the hills and blue berries in the marshes, while black
berries grew at the edges of the swamps, yellow ones on the mossy
hillocks, and the elder-trees were covered with rich purple grapes,
while the woods re-echoed with the song, and its notes spread far over
the heaths and meadows till the little water-nymphs shed tears of
rapture.

The third brother sat down under a magnificent oak in the sacred
oak-forest of Taara, and began to sing a song. As he sang, the wild
beasts of the neighbouring woods and heaths gathered round him, and the
cuckoos, doves, magpies, larks, nightingales, and swallows joined in the
concert. The swans, geese, and ducks swam towards the sound, the waves
of the sea beat on the rocks, and the crowns of the trees bowed down.
The green hills trembled, and the clouds parted to permit the sky to
listen to the singing, while the forest-king's daughter, the slender
wood-nymphs, and the yellow-haired water-nymphs wept tears of rapture
and glowed with longing for the handsome singer.

Evening now approached, and the heroes made the best of their way
homewards, the youngest, as before, loading himself with all the game.
They looked out anxiously for the smoke of their home and the glow of
the kitchen-fire, but they could discover nothing.

They quickened their pace as they crossed the deep sand of the heath,
but no smoke nor fire nor steam from the kettle could be seen. They
rushed into the house, but the fire was out and the hearth was cold.
Again and again they shouted to their mother, but there was no answer
save the echo. The evening became darker and stiller, and the brothers
went out to search in different directions. The youngest went down to
the beach, where he found such traces of his mother's presence that he
concluded that she had been carried off by her disappointed suitor, the
Finnish sorcerer.

The eldest brother proposed that they should eat their supper and go to
sleep, hoping that a dream might show them where to seek for their
mother. The second assented, hoping that Ukko would send them a vision;
but the youngest was unwilling to put off till to-morrow what might be
done to-day, and finally determined to repair to his father's grave.[36]

    From his grave there spoke the father--
    "Who upon the sand is treading,
    With his feet the grave disturbing?
    In my eyes the sand is running,
    On my eyelids grass is pressing."

The youth told his father who he was, and all his trouble, and implored
him to rise and help him. But his father answered that he could not
rise, for the rocks lay on his breast, lilies of the valley on his
eyelids, harebells on his eyes, and red flowers on his cheeks. But he
prayed the wind to show his son the right path, and a gentle zephyr to
guide him on the way pointed out by the stars of heaven. So the young
hero returned to the sea-shore and followed his mother's footprints till
they were lost in the sea. He gazed over the sea and shore, but could
detect no further traces of her, nor was any boat in sight. There he sat
till it grew quite dark, and the moon and stars appeared in the sky; but
winds and waves, sea and sky, moon and stars, alike were silent, and
brought him no tidings of his mother.

[Footnote 32: The Esthonian Thunder-God goes by a variety of names, but
is usually called Pikker or Pikne, evidently the Perkunas of the
Lithuanians. He resembles Thor in driving about in a chariot, waging war
with the evil demons; but one of his attributes, not appertaining to
Thor, is his flute (or bagpipe, as some critics regard it). It will be
seen in many places that the Esthonians, like all other peoples among
whom the belief in fairies, demons, &c., survives, do not share the
absurd modern notion that such beings must necessarily be immortal.]

[Footnote 33: Peter, in the story of the Lucky Rouble, is also attended
by three black dogs. The dogs of the sons of Kalev were named Irmi,
Armi, and Mustukene; the last name means Blackie, not Throttler, as
Reinthal translates it.]

[Footnote 34: In the _Maha-Bharata_ Bhima is represented as carrying
enormous loads, and in one passage Yudhishthira is searching for his
brother in the Himalayas, when he comes to a place where slaughtered
lions and tigers are lying about by thousands, which convinces him that
he is on the right track.]

[Footnote 35: This passage would seem to indicate that the daughter of
the king of Kungla was sometimes looked upon rather as a fairy than as a
human princess.]

[Footnote 36: Visits to a father's grave for counsel are very common in
the literature of Northern Europe.]




CANTO IV

THE ISLAND MAIDEN


When the Kalevide had satisfied himself that no further traces of his
mother were to be found, he cast himself into the sea beneath the stars,
and swam northwards manfully towards Finland, swimming with his hands,
steering with his feet, and with his hair floating like a sail. He swam
on till past midnight without meeting with a resting-place; but at
length he espied a black speck in the distance, which proved to be a
small rocky island. The hero discovered a mossy bank on a projecting
rock, and made his way to the shore, and lay down, intending to sleep a
little, when he was roused by the voice of a maiden singing a love-song.
It was very dark and somewhat foggy, but he saw the light of a fire at a
little distance at the foot of an oak-tree, beneath which sat a fair
girl with brown eyes.[37] The hero soon joined her, and they talked
together for some time, when the maiden became alarmed at his
familiarities, and cried out. Her mother awoke, and thought it was only
a bad dream; but her father hastened to her aid, armed with a great
club. But when he saw the terrible giant, he grew as pale as death, and
his club dropped from his hand.

The maiden could not lift her eyes to her father, but the Kalevide asked
carelessly if he had seen the Finnish sorcerer pass the island in his
boat on the previous evening. "No," replied the islander, "I have not
seen anything of him for weeks; but tell me your name and lineage, for I
judge that you are of the race of the gods." The hero answered him
fully; but when the maiden heard that he was the son of Kalev and Linda,
she was seized with terror, and her foot slipping she fell from the
cliff into the sea.

The father shrieked and wrung his hands, but the Kalevide plunged into
the sea after the maiden, and sought for her for a long time in vain.
When he abandoned the search, he did not venture to return to the
island, but after crying out a few words of unavailing regret swam again
towards Finland. The father's cry of despair fully roused the mother,
who sprang up, and ran down to the shore, only to learn that her
daughter was lost.

Then the mother took a rake with a long copper handle, and the father
took his net, and with them they sought for their daughter's body at the
bottom of the sea.[38] They did not find their daughter, but they raked
up an oak-tree, a fir-tree, an eagle's egg, an iron helmet, a fish, and
a silver dish. They took them all carefully home, and went again to seek
for their lost child.

Then a song arose from the deep, telling how a maiden went down to the
sea:[39]

    What beheld she in the ocean?
    What beneath the sea was shining?
    From the sea a sword shone golden,
    In the waves a spear of silver,
    From the sand a copper crossbow.
    Then to grasp the sword she hastened,
    And to seize the spear of silver,
    And to lift the copper crossbow.

      Then there came a man to meet her;
    'Twas an aged man of copper;[40]
    On his head a helm of copper;
    Wearing, too, a shirt of copper;
    Round his waist a belt of copper;
    On his hands were copper gauntlets;
    On his feet were boots of copper;
    In his belt were copper buckles,
    And the buckles chased with copper;
    Copper was his neck and body,
    And his face and eyes were copper.
    And the copper man demanded:
    "In the sea what seeks the maiden,
    Singing thus amid the waters,
    She, a dove[41] among the fishes?"

      And the maiden heard and hearkened,
    And the little duck made answer:
    "To the sea I went to rock me,
    And amid the waves to carol;
    And I saw the sword that glittered,
    And the spear of silver shining,
    And the copper crossbow gleaming.
    And to grasp the sword I hastened,
    And to seize the spear of silver,
    And to lift the copper crossbow."

      Then the copper man made answer,
    With his copper tongue he answered:
    "'Tis the sword of son of Kalev,
    And the spear is son of Alev's,
    And the crossbow son of Sulev's.
    On the bed of ocean guarded,
    Here the man of copper keeps them,
    Of the golden sword the guardian,
    Guardian of the spear of silver,
    Guardian of the copper crossbow."

Then the man of copper offered her the weapons if she would take him as
her husband, but she refused, saying that she was the daughter of a
landsman, and preferred a husband from the village on the land. He
laughed scornfully; her foot slipped, and she sank into the sea. Her
father and mother came to seek her, and found only her ornaments
scattered on the beach. They called her by her name, and implored her to
go home with them; but she answered that she could not, for she was
weighed down by the water; and she related to them her adventure with
the copper man. But she begged her parents not to weep for her, for she
had a house at the bottom of the sea, and a soft resting-place in the
ooze.

    "Do not weep, my dearest mother,
    Nor lament, my dearest father.
    In the sea is now my dwelling,
    On its bed a pleasant chamber,
    In the depths a room to rest in,
    In the ooze a nest of softness."

[Footnote 37: The story in the _Kalevipoeg_ is very confused, but this
maiden evidently corresponds to the lost sister of Kullervo (_Kalevala_,
Runo 35), whom he meets casually, and seduces. When they discover the
truth, the girl throws herself into a torrent. In the _Kalevipoeg_,
Canto 7, the Kalevide and the maiden are actually spoken of as brother
and sister. There are many versions of this story; in one of them (Neus,
_Ehstnische Volkslieder_, pp. 5-8; Latham's _Nationalities of Europe_,
i. p. 138), the maiden is represented as slaying her brother, who is
called indifferently the son of Kalev or of Sulev, to the great
satisfaction of her father and mother.]

[Footnote 38: In the _Kalevala_, Runo 15, Lemminkainen's mother collects
together the fragments of his body from the River of Death with a long
rake.]

[Footnote 39: This song and story (except for the incident of the man of
copper) resembles that of the drowning of Aino in the _Kalevala_, Runo
4.]

[Footnote 40: It was a copper man who rose from the water to fell the
great oak-tree (_Kalevala_, Runo 2). Compare also the variant in Canto 6
of the _Kalevipoeg_. We may also remember the copper men connected with
the mountain of loadstone (_Thousand and One Nights_, Third Calendar's
Story).]

[Footnote 41: Literally a "house-hen;" one of those idiomatic terms of
endearment which cannot be reproduced in another language.]




CANTO V

THE KALEVIDE AND THE FINNISH SORCERER


Day was breaking as the dauntless swimmer approached the coast of
Finland, where his enemy, the sorcerer, had arrived somewhat before him,
and had made his boat fast under a projecting rock. The Kalevide gazed
round without seeing any traces of him, and lay down to sleep; but
though the morning was calm and peaceful, his dreams were but of battle
and murder.

Meantime the islander and his wife, not being able to find their
daughter, returned home weeping, and planted the oak and the fir in the
field where their daughter used to swing in the evening, in remembrance
of her. Then they went to look in the helmet where they had put the egg;
but it was cold and damp, so the mother put the egg in the warm sun by
day, and nursed it in her bosom at night.

Then they went to look at the trees, and the oak had already shot up a
hundred fathoms, and the fir-tree ten. Next they visited the fish,
which prayed for its liberty, and they restored it to the sea.

The oak and fir now reached the clouds; and a young eagle was hatched
from the egg, which the mother tended; but one day it escaped and flew
away. The oak now scattered the clouds and threatened to pierce the sky.
Then they sought a sorcerer to fell the tree, and the woman took a
golden rake on her shoulder with a copper handle and silver prongs. She
raked up three swathes of grass, and in the third she found the eagle
which she had lately reared from the egg. She took him home, and under
his wing was a little man, scarcely two spans high, holding an axe in
his hands.[42]

The Kalevide had only intended to take a short nap, but he was so weary
that he slept all through the day and night, and did not awake till
sunrise next morning.[43] When he awoke, he set off at once in search
of his mother and the sorcerer into the interior of the country. At last
he climbed a high mountain, and saw from thence an inhabited valley with
a brook running through it, and the sorcerer's farm at the edge of the
wood.

The son of Kalev rushed down the mountain and through the plain till he
reached the gate of the enclosure and looked in. The sorcerer was lying
on the grass in the shade of his house. The Kalevide turned towards the
wood, tore up an oak-tree by the roots, and trimmed it into a club. He
swung it in his right hand, and strode through the enclosure, the whole
country trembling and the hills and valleys shaking with fear as he
advanced.

The sorcerer started from his sleep, and saw Linda's avenger at the
gate, but he was too unnerved and terrified to attempt to hide himself.
He hurriedly took a handful of feathers from his bosom, and blew them
from him with a few magic words, and lo! they became an armed host of
warriors,--thousands of them, both on foot and on horseback.[44] They
rushed upon the son of Kalev like a swarm of gnats or bees; but he laid
about him with his club as if he was threshing, and beat them down,
horse and man together, on all sides, like drops of hail or rain. The
fight was hardly begun when it was over, and the hero waded chest-deep
in blood. The sorcerer, whose magic troops had never failed him before,
was now at his wit's end, and prayed for mercy, giving a long account of
how he had endeavoured to carry off Linda, and had been struck down by
the enraged Thunder-God. But the Kalevide paid no attention to his
speech, and, after a few angry words, he smashed his head with his club.
Then he rushed through the house from room to room in search of his
mother, breaking open every door and lock which opposed him, while the
noise resounded far over the country. But he found not his mother, and
regretted that he had killed the sorcerer, who might have helped him. At
last, wearied out with his own violence, he threw himself on a couch,
and wept himself to sleep. He had a vision of his mother in her youth
and beauty, swinging with her companions, and awoke, convinced that she
was really dead.

[Footnote 42: We find this great oak-tree over and over again in Finnish
and Esthonian tales. Compare _Kalevala_, Runo 2, and Cantos 4, 5, 6, and
16 of the _Kalevipoeg_. Neus, _Ehstnische Volkslieder_, p. 47;
Kreutzwald and Neus, _Mythische und Magische Lieder_, p. 8, &c. Could
this oak have any connection, direct or indirect, with the ash
Yggthrasil? or could the story have originated in some report or
tradition of the banyan?]

[Footnote 43: The tremendous exploits of the Kalevide and his weariness
afterwards give him much of the character of a Berserk.]

[Footnote 44: In the 26th Runo of the _Kalevala_ Lemminkainen creates a
flock of birds from a handful of feathers, to appease the fiery eagle
who obstructed his way to Pohjola. We may also remember Jason and the
dragon's teeth.]




CANTO VI

THE KALEVIDE AND THE SWORD-SMITHS


The Kalevide mourned two days for his mother, but on the third day he
began to get over his grief, and determined, before returning home, to
visit a famous smith of Finland, and to provide himself with a good
sword. So he set off in another direction, and lost himself in the
woods, and had to pass the night on the wet grass under a fir-tree,
which he did not at all relish. Next morning he started off again early,
and a thrush sang to him, and directed him to turn to the west. He
sprang forward with renewed energy and soon found himself in the open
country, where he encountered an old woman,[45] who gave him minute
instructions for finding his way to the smithy, which was three days'
journey off. When at length he reached the smithy, he found the old
smith and his three sons hard at work forging swords.

The hero saluted the smith, who replied to him courteously, and at once
acceded to his request to try the swords before purchasing one. At a
sign from the smith, one of the sons went out and fetched an armful of
swords. The Kalevide picked out the longest, and bent it into a hoop,
when it straightened itself at once. He then whirled it round his head,
and struck at the massive rock which stood in the smithy with all his
might. The sparks flew from the stone and the blade shivered to pieces,
while the old smith looked on and swore.

"Who mixes up children's toys with weapons for men?" said the Kalevide
scornfully, and caught up a second and third sword, which he shivered in
the same way before the smith could interfere. "Stop, stop," cried the
smith at last, "don't break any more swords to show off your strength;"
and he called to his sons to bring some swords of the best quality they
had.

The youths brought in an armful of the very best, and the Kalevide chose
a huge sword, which he brandished like a reed in his right hand, and
then brought down on the anvil. The sword cut deep into the iron, and
the blade did not fly, but the sharp edge was somewhat blunted.

Then the smith was well pleased, and said that he had one sword in store
worthy of the strength of the hero, if he was rich enough to buy it;
for, between friends, the price was nine strong carthorses, four pairs
of good packhorses, twenty good milch kine, ten pairs of good yoke oxen,
fifty well-fed calves, a hundred tons of the best wheat, two boatsful of
barley, and a large shipload of rye, a thousand old dollars, a hundred
pairs of bracelets, two hundred gold coins, a lapful of silver brooches,
the third of a kingdom, and the dowries of three maidens.

Then from a little iron cupboard they fetched a sword which had not its
equal in the world, and on which the smith and his sons had laboured for
seven long years without intermission. It was wrought of seven different
kinds of Swedish iron with the aid of seven powerful charms, and was
tempered in seven different waters, from those of the sea and Lake
Peipus to rain-water. It had been bespoken by Kalev himself, but he had
not lived till the work was completed.

The son of Kalev received the huge blade from the hands of the smith
with reverence, and whirled it round like a fiery wheel, and it whistled
through the air like the tempest that breaks oaks and unroofs houses.
Then he turned and brought down the keen edge like a flash of lightning
on the great anvil, and clove it to the ground without the sword
receiving the slightest injury.

Then the hero joyfully expressed his thanks to the smith for forging
such a splendid sword, and promised to bring him the full price demanded
upon his return to Esthonia. But the smith said he would rather go and
fetch the value of the sword himself.

And now a great drinking-bout was prepared in honour of the sword and
its owner, which lasted for seven days. Beer and mead flowed in
abundance, and the guests drank till they lost all restraint, shouting
and laughing, and throwing their caps about, and rolling on the grass.

The Kalevide had lost his senses like the rest, and told the whole story
of his adventure on the island and the drowning of the maiden. Upon
this, the eldest son of the smith, his father's pride and joy, sprang
forward, denouncing him for his aspersions on the maiden's honour. The
Kalevide defied him, maintaining the truth of the story, and from words
they soon came to blows; and, before any one could comprehend what was
going on or interfere, the Kalevide drew the sword from its sheath and
struck off the head of his adversary before the face of his father,
mother, and brothers, the hero thus loading himself with a second great
crime.

The youth's father shrieked with horror and his mother fell fainting to
the ground; the smith then cried out to the Kalevide that he had
murdered the support of his old age, and had stained the innocence and
honour of his new sword for ever. Then he called to his sons to fetch
the hammers from the smithy and break the bones of the murderer. But the
drunken giant advanced against them with his sword, defying them to the
combat; and the smith, recognising the hopelessness of any attempt
against him, cried to his sons to let him pass and leave vengeance to
the gods, cursing him like a mad dog, and calling on the sword itself to
avenge the crime. But the Kalevide seemed to hear nothing, and staggered
away from the house through the wood along the road till he came to a
high waterfall. He followed the course of the stream some distance till
he found a resting-place, where he laid down, and snored till the whole
neighbourhood shook, and people asked in fear whether enemies had
invaded the land and a battle was in progress.

The oak which the islander had planted sprang up, first as a small tree,
but it grew so rapidly that it reached the clouds, and almost touched
the sun. The sun and moon were hidden, the windows darkened, and all the
country around made dismal by the shadow of its branches. The islander
sought far and near for some one to fell the tree, for whole cities and
fleets might have been built of its wood. Proclamation was made
everywhere for some one to fell the tree, but no one dared to attempt
it, and he returned home, grumbling to his wife at the failure of his
long and fruitless journey. Then the old woman led the way to the room
where the eagle and the dwarf were still remaining, and told her husband
how she had found the dwarf, who was no larger than Kalev's thumb, under
the wing of the eagle. The islander asked the dwarf if he would fell the
oak-tree, and he consented at once, on condition that he should be
released from his captivity; he was also given a dish of pure gold.

The dwarf went out and took a good look at the oak-tree, and then he
himself began to grow, first by ells, and then by fathoms. Having thus
become a giant, he began to hew at the tree, and he hewed at it for
three days, till it fell, covering half the island and half the sea with
its branches. The trunk was used to make a great bridge, with two arms,
reaching from the island to Finland on the one side, and to Esthonia on
the other. Large ships were built of the summit, merchant-vessels from
the trunk, towns from the roots, rowing-boats from the branches, and
children's boats from the chips. What remained was used to make shelters
for weak old men, sick widows, and orphan children, and the last
branches left were used to build a little room in which the minstrel
could sing his songs. Strangers who came now and then across the bridge
stopped before the minstrel's hut to ask the name of the city with the
magnificent palace; and the minstrel replied that there was nothing
there but his poor hut, and all the splendour they beheld was the light
of his songs reflected from heaven.

[Footnote 45: In the _Kalevala_ (Runo 34) an old woman directs Kullervo
to the house of his parents.]




CANTO VII

THE RETURN OF THE KALEVIDE


The Kalevide slept till the following morning, and when at length he
awoke he tried in vain to recollect the events of the day before. He
could not remember whether he had been in Finland or on the island, or
whether he had been engaged in battle. He had no remembrance of having
slain the smith's son; but he got up half-dazed, and walked on without
stopping till he reached the seashore on the third day afterwards. Here
he found the sorcerer's boat; so he stepped into it, hoisted sail, and
set off homewards.

    Kalev's offspring was not weary,
    For his back was like an oak-tree,
    And his shoulders gnarled and knotted,
    And his arms like trunks of oak-trees,
    And like elm-trees were his elbows,
    And his fingers spread like branches,
    And his finger-nails like boxwood,
    And his loins like hardened iron.

The Kalevide was now in high spirits, and began to sing a song, in which
he pictured himself as going on a voyage, and meeting three shiploads of
enchantresses, old and young, whose blandishments he resisted. But as he
approached the shores of Esthonia, the fresh sea-breeze dispelled the
mists that still clouded his memory, and the blood-stained sword and the
splashes of blood on his clothes bore witness of the murder he had
committed.

About midnight he approached the small island where the maiden had
fallen into the sea, and the whole sad scene arose again before his
imagination. And now he could hear the maiden singing a sad song beneath
the waves, lamenting her sad fate, and yet more the evil lot of her
brother, who had slain the son of his father's old friend.[46] The blood
from the sword reddened the cheeks of the maiden, and a long and
terrible penance lay before her brother.

For a while the hero sat lost in thought, bitterly lamenting the past;
but presently he roused himself, and proceeded on his voyage, singing a
lamentation for his mother beginning:

    Where upgrows the weeping alder,
    And the aspen of confusion,
    And the pine-tree of distraction,
    And the deep remorse of birch-tree?
    Where I sorrow, springs the alder;
    Where I tremble, sprouts the aspen;
    Where I weep, the pine is verdant;
    Where I suffer, sighs the birch-tree.

Next morning the Kalevide reached the shore, made fast the boat, and
went homewards; but as he passed Mount Iru, where the form of his mother
stood, his steps were arrested by the sweet singing of her unseen spirit
in the wind. She sang how the young eagle had soared from the nest in
youthful innocence, and had returned stained with crime. He knew now
that his mother was dead, and realised more fully the two crimes which
weighed upon his soul--the one committed thoughtlessly and without evil
intent, and the other without his knowledge, when he was not master of
himself. He hastened on, and when he reached home his brothers, who had
long mourned him as dead, received him with open arms.

In the evening the three brothers sat together and related their
adventures. The first sang how he had wandered in search of his mother
over vast regions, and through a great part of Courland, Poland,
Russia, Germany, and Norway, and had met on his wanderings maidens of
tin, copper, silver, and gold. But only the golden daughter of the Gold
King could speak, and she directed him along a path which would lead him
to a beautiful maiden who could reply to his question. He hurried on a
long way, and at last met a rosy-cheeked maiden of flesh and bone, who
replied to his questions that she had seen no traces of his mother, and
the hawk must have flown away with her. But she invited him to her
village, where he would find plenty of rich and beautiful maidens. He
answered that he had not come to choose a wife, but to seek his mother.

Then the second brother sang how he also had wandered a long way, but at
last reached a cottage where he found an old man and woman, whom he
saluted and asked for tidings. They made no reply, and only the cat
mewed in answer.

He went on farther, and met a wolf; but when he asked if he had seen his
mother, he only opened his mouth to grin at him. Next he met the bear,
who only growled, but finally the cuckoo[47] directed him through a
wood and across a green meadow to some maidens who would give him
information. When he reached the spot, he found four beautiful maidens
in elegant attire, who told him that they had been wandering about the
woods and meadows every day, but had seen nothing of his mother, and
they thought she must have flown away. They recommended him to seek a
wife; but he answered that a young wife could not fill the place of his
dear lost mother.

Then the youngest brother related his adventures; but he said nothing
about the fatal brawl at the smith's feast, nor of the sad songs of the
island-maiden and of the spirit of his mother.

Then the eldest brother remarked that they knew not what had become of
their mother, but their parents were no more, and they must shift for
themselves, so he proposed a trial to decide which of the three should
rule as king in the land. The second brother agreed, and the third
proposed that the trial should take place next day, and be decided
according to the will of Taara.

In the evening, before twilight had quite given way to night, the
youngest son took his handkerchief, which was wet with tears, and
climbed up his father's cairn. And his father asked from below:

    "Who disturbs the sandy hillock,
    With his feet the grave disturbing,
    Stamping with his heels the gravel,
    And the gravestone thus disturbing?"

The hero besought his father to rise up and stroke his hair and speak to
him; but his father answered that he had long lain in his grave; his
bones were decayed, and the grass and moss grew over him, and he could
not rise. Let the wind and the sun caress his son. The son answered that
the wind only blew sometimes, and the sun only shone by day, but Taara
lives for ever. And the father told him not to weep or grieve, for the
spirit of his dead father should follow him throughout his life, and
that the good gods would protect him even through the desert wastes of
the waters of the ocean; and he also counselled him to do his best to
atone for every fault and error.

[Footnote 46: The smith is sometimes called the uncle of Kalev; but the
term may only mean that he was an old friend.]

[Footnote 47: The cuckoo is a sacred bird, but more often alluded to in
Finnish than in Esthonian literature.]




CANTO VIII

THE CONTEST AND PARTING OF THE BROTHERS


On the following morning the three sons of Kalev set out before sunrise
towards the south; but they rested under the trees and took some
refreshment during the heat of the day. In the evening they passed a
house which was lighted up as if for company. The father and mother
stood at the door, and invited them to choose brides from among their
rich and beautiful daughters. The eldest brother answered that they were
not come to woo brides, and had no thought of marriage; but the second
brother said he should like the girls to come out to swing with them;
and they were forthwith summoned. Then the youngest brother said he
hoped the young ladies would not distress themselves, but really he and
his brothers had no idea of marrying at present, and they must beg to be
excused.

Then they continued their journey southwards, and on the third day they
reached a small lake with steep banks.[48] Water-birds were sporting in
the lake, and on the opposite shore they saw the holy forest of Taara
shining in the sunset. "Here is the place where our lot must be
decided," said the eldest brother; and each selected a stone for the
trial of strength. It was arranged that whoever should cast his stone
across the lake to the firm ground opposite should be adjudged his
father's heir, and the other two should wander forth to seek their
fortunes in other lands.

The eldest brother, in all friendliness, claimed his right to the first
trial, and cast his stone. It flew from his hand with the speed of a
bird or of the tempest, but suddenly changed its direction, and plunged
into the middle of the lake. The water foamed up over it, and entirely
concealed it from sight.

The second brother then seized his stone, and sent it whistling through
the air like an arrow. It rose up till it was nearly lost to sight, and
then turned and fell on the shore close to the water, where it sank for
half its bulk into the mud. Then came the turn of the third, who,
though the youngest, was much taller and stronger than his brothers.

The youngest brother made some sad reflections on his posthumous birth,
and on the course of his childhood, and then cast forth his rock like a
bird, or like a ship in a storm. It flew up far and high, but not up to
the clouds, like that cast by his brother, and afterwards made great
ducks and drakes across the whole lake, reaching at last the firm ground
beyond.

"Don't let us wait here," said the eldest brother, "but let us go and
look for the stones, and decide our competition." As the nearest way to
the opposite shore was through the lake, they waded straight across it,
and at the deepest place the water reached a little above their knees.
The stone cast by the eldest brother had disappeared entirely in the
water, and no trace of it could be found; but that thrown by the second
was found on the shore half sunken in the mud. Only the stone thrown by
the youngest brother, easily recognisable by its marks, was found on
firm ground, lying on the grass at some little distance beyond the lake.
Then the eldest brother declared that the gods had plainly assigned the
kingdom to the youngest, and that the others must now bathe him and
adorn him as king.[49] After this the three brothers took an
affectionate leave of each other, and the two elder ones wandered
cheerfully away. The youngest sat on the rock sadly reflecting on the
lost joys of youth, and how he must now depend on his own unaided
efforts. At length he threw a silver coin into the water as an offering
to the gods, an old custom now forgotten.

It was the duty of the new king both to plough the country and to defend
it, and he therefore set to work with his sword by his side. Early and
late he ploughed, stocking the country with corn, grass, trees, and
berries.

One hot noonday, seeing his white horse[50] nearly exhausted, he unyoked
him from the plough, hobbled him, and left him to graze, while he
himself lay down in the grass and fell asleep. His head rested on the
top of a hill, and his body and legs spread far over the plain below.
The sweat ran from his forehead and sank into the earth, whence arose a
healing and strengthening spring of wonderful virtues. Those who taste
the water of this spring are greatly strengthened; weak children grow
strong, the sick grow healthy; the water heals sore eyes, and even
blindness; the weary are refreshed, and the maidens who taste it have
rosy cheeks for their whole lifetime.

While the Kalevide lay asleep, he dreamed that he saw his good horse
torn to pieces by wolves. And truly the horse had strayed away to some
distance, when a host of wild animals, wolves, bears, and foxes, emerged
from the forest. As the horse's feet were hobbled, he could not escape,
and was soon overtaken. He defended himself as well as he could with
hoofs and head, and killed many of the beasts; but he was finally
overpowered by their ever-increasing numbers, and fell. Where he sank
the ground is hollow, and a number of little hills represent the wolves
killed in the struggle. The horse's blood formed a red lake, his liver a
mountain, his entrails a marsh, his bones hills, his hair rushes, his
mane bulrushes, and his tail hazel-bushes.[51]

[Footnote 48: This lake (Saad järv) lies a little north of Dorpat.]

[Footnote 49: Nothing is said as to how the government was carried on
during the Kalevide's minority.]

[Footnote 50: White horses constantly occur in Esthonian tales; and the
devil's mother or grandmother usually appears as a white mare. One of
the commentators remarks that as the white horse was sacred in
pre-Christian times, the missionaries represented it as peculiarly
diabolical. It will be remembered with what severity the early
missionaries suppressed the horse feasts among the Teutonic tribes.]

[Footnote 51: This is a little like the formation of the world from the
body of the giant Ymir, as described in the Edda. As W. Herbert
paraphrases it,

    "Of his bones the rocks high swelling,
      Of his flesh the globe is made,
    From his veins the tide is welling,
      And his locks are verdant shade."

"Helga" is a somewhat poor production, containing but few striking
passages except the description of the appearance of the Valkyrior
before the fight between Hialmar and Angantyr. But the shorter poems at
the end, "The Song of Vala" and "Brynhilda," ought to be alone
sufficient to remove the name of this forgotten poet from oblivion.]




CANTO IX

RUMOURS OF WAR


When the Kalevide awoke, he followed the traces of his horse till he
found the remains; and he secured the skin as a relic, cursing the
wolves, and then drew his sword, and rushed into the wood in pursuit of
them, breaking down the trees and bushes in his way, and destroying all
the wild beasts he met with, while those who could fled to distant
swamps and thickets. He would have utterly exterminated all the wolves
and bears, if the increasing darkness of night had not compelled him at
length to desist from further pursuit. He retired to the open country,
and being wearied out, lay down to sleep on the skin of the horse. But
he had scarcely closed his eyes before a messenger arrived from the
elders of Esthonia, announcing that war had broken out, and that a
hostile army was ravaging the country.

The Kalevide heard the long and woful story to an end, and then threw
himself down again to sleep off his weariness, when another messenger
arrived, whom he sharply upbraided for disturbing him.

The second messenger was a venerable old man with a white beard. He
saluted the king, and apologised for disturbing him, but reminded him
that when he was young the birds had sung to him that a ruler could know
no rest:

    Heavy cares oppress the monarch,
    And a weighty load the ruler;
    Heavier yet a hero's burden:
    Thousand duties wait the strongest;
    More await the Kalevide!

He then spoke encouragingly to the king, assuring him that much would
result from all his labours for the good of his people. The Kalevide
answered that he would not shun toil and weariness, and would do his
best. The old man assured him that nothing could prosper without the aid
of the gods; and now the Kalevide recognised that Ukko himself spoke
with him. Then the god exhorted him not to quarrel with destiny, and
warned him to beware of his sword, for murder could only be atoned for
by murder, and he who had murdered an innocent man was never secure.

His voice died away in the wind, and the Kalevide sank into slumber till
dawn; and when he awoke he could only recall vague fragments of the long
discourse he had heard in his vision. He then gave the Esthonian
messenger directions for the conduct of the war, and especially the
defence of the coasts, asking to be particularly informed if the war
should spread farther and the need grow greater, and then he himself
would come at once; but he was compelled to rest a little from his
fatigues before he could take part in the war in person.

Here is inserted the grand ballad of the Herald of War, from Neus,
_Ehstnische Volkslieder_, p. 305. It is out of place in the
_Kalevipoeg_, but will be included in a later section of our work.




CANTO X

THE HEROES AND THE WATER-DEMON


As the Kalevide was wandering through Esthonia, he arrived one day at
the swamp of Kikerpärä. Two demon brothers had settled themselves in the
swamp, and were fighting for its possession, and when the hero appeared
they referred their dispute to him. As he could not stay to attend to
the matter himself, he requested his friend, the son of Alev, who was
with him, to measure out the swamp fairly. So the Alevide began to drive
piles into the bed of the river at a place called Mustapall, to fasten
his measuring lines to, when the wretched old water-demon[52] raised his
head from the river, and asked what he was doing. The hero replied that
he was damming up the river; but the demon, who had lived under the
water for many years, and did not like to be turned out of his
comfortable home, offered him a reward to desist. So the Alevide asked
him to fill his old felt hat for him with bright silver coins; which he
promised to do on the morrow, the hero declaring that he would hold him
to his bargain in the words of the proverb:[53]

    By the horns the ox we grapple,
    By his word the man is fastened.

Then the demon dived back into the water, while the son of Alev, who was
a cousin of the Kalevide, got a friend to help him to dig a hole in the
ground during the night, a fathom in depth and broad at the bottom, but
with an opening at the top just wide enough for the top of the hat to
fit into; but the hat was cut at the sides, so that the heavy money
should fall through into the pit.

Before daybreak the stupid demon brought a lapful of roubles,[54] which
he poured into the hat. He brought a second and a third, and afterwards
brought money by the hogshead, but the hat still remained empty.
Presently his coffers, purses, and pockets were all exhausted. He then
begged for time; but the Alevide declared that if he did not keep his
promise, and fill his hat with bright silver coins, he should begin his
work again.

Then the demon thought of appealing to his mother to help him; but first
he asked the Alevide to come with him to receive his money himself,
hoping to circumvent him. But the hero knew that it was only a trick to
get him away from the hat, so he refused to budge, but sent the
Kalevide's cupbearer, the smallest of the company, to help to carry the
money.

The boy was ready at once; but his heart failed him as the demon
preceded him to the under-world,[55] leading him by paths that no living
man had ever trodden before, and through an utterly unknown country,
where the sun and moon never shone, and where the only light came from
the torches that flared on both sides of their way. When they reached
the palace of the demon, his sons came to the door, and invited the
guest to take his place at the table, which was loaded with gold and
silver plate, and eat and drink. But the boy could touch nothing from
terror, for sparks of fire flew from the dishes and viands, and blue
flames played over the beakers.

Then the water-demons began to titter, and to whisper to each other in
their own language, which sounded just like Lettish,[56] and which their
guest could not understand. The boy began to reproach his avaricious
friend in his thoughts for having thus sent him to Põrgu without
thinking of what might happen to him; but presently the younger demons
seized upon him, and began to toss him from one to another like a ball,
sometimes from one side of the room to the other, and sometimes up to
the ceiling.

The boy begged them to let him rest a little, and presently they allowed
him to do so. Then he drew a cord from his pocket, and pretended to
measure the length and breadth of the room. Presently he came to the
door, and seized the opportunity to bolt, and was fortunate enough to
make his way back to daylight, where the demon had no more power to
interfere with him.

As he passed the gates, the guards whispered to him to turn to the right
to avoid the many snares in his path. He did not escape without a good
fright; for only strong men can go where they please, like the birds,
while the weak man is exposed to a thousand terrors. On the boy's way he
met a small bitch[57] accompanied by two puppies; and this was the
mother of the demons, just returning from the bath-house. The boy now
remembered the warning he had received, and turned aside to the right,
and the three ran past without noticing him.

When the boy reached the place where he had left the Alevide, he found
that both his friend and the money had disappeared. Presently the
water-demon came up, and asked him jestingly whether he had burnt
himself, or whether he had been stung by a gadfly, that he ran away like
that, instead of helping him to carry the heavy money-bags. He then
proposed that they should look for a good place where they might
wrestle. He thought he could easily overcome the boy by strength, if not
by craft, and the boy consented.

Before they had gone far, they met the sons of Kalev and Alev, who had
hidden their treasure, walking arm-in-arm. The Kalevide asked, "Whence
did you bring that Lettish comrade, and to what queer race does he
belong?" His cousin answered that he was the same who had promised to
fill his hat with silver, and hadn't kept his word. Then the boy said
that they were going to engage in a contest, and the Kalevide answered,
"You must grow a little taller, my lad, before you engage in a serious
struggle, for you are only a child at present."

So the Kalevide, laughing, stuck the boy in his trouser-pocket to grow,
and took over the challenge himself, and they all went to a mountain
where the contest was to take place; and first they began with hurling
stones. The demon took up a rock, which he balanced for an hour in his
clumsy fingers, and at last swung it round more than ten times before he
loosed it. The stone fell ten paces from the sandy shore of Lake Virts,
and it lies there now, conspicuous by its size, for it is at least as
big as a bath-house.

Then the Kalevide took up a rock in his hand, and threw it without more
ado. They heard it rushing through the air for a long time, and at last
it fell on the shore of Lake Peipus, and any one who visits the lake can
see it there. Then they engaged in a wrestling match, and the Kalevide
soon lifted the demon from his feet and flung him into the air. When he
came to the ground, he rolled seven versts, and then fell down a little
hill among the bushes, where he lay stunned for seven days, hardly able
to open his eyes or lift his head, or even to move a limb.

At this the Kalevide and his companions laughed till the hills shook,
and the cup-bearer loudest of all. Then the Alevide told his story; but
when he came to mention the proverb, it reminded the son of Kalev that
he had not yet paid the debt which he owed to the smith in Finland for
his sword. So the Kalevide asked his cousin to take the goods across to
Finland, and he himself laid down to rest under a tree, and pondered on
how he could provide for the safety of the people during the war. He
decided to improve and beautify the towns as well as to fortify them,
and to make an excursion to survey the country while his cousin was away
in Finland. Presently the Kalevide felt in his pocket, and pulled out
the boy, with whom he began to jest; but soon their conversation became
more serious, and the Kalevide ordered him to wait for the expected
messengers, while he himself should proceed to Lake Peipus, where he had
important business.

As the Kalevide proceeded on his journey, he passed a well in a lonely
place, where the Air-Maiden,[58] the fair daughter of the Thunder-God,
sat bewailing the loss of her ring, which had dropped into it.[59] When
the hero saw the blue-eyed, golden-haired maiden in tears, he asked the
cause of her trouble, and when he heard it he plunged into the well to
look for the ring. A party of young sorcerers quickly gathered round,
thinking that the mouse was in the trap, and they flung a great
millstone after him. But he searched in the mud and water for some time,
and presently sprang out of the water with the millstone on his finger,
which he offered to the maiden, saying that he had not been able to find
anything else in the mud, and that she would not need a larger
finger-ring.

[Footnote 52: The Esthonian demons are often represented as contemptible
creatures, very easily outwitted. Later in the present canto the
personage in question is distinctly called a water-demon.]

[Footnote 53: A common proverb in Esthonian tales. We also find it in
Italian, in almost the same words.]

[Footnote 54: The money is sometimes called roubles, and sometimes
thalers.]

[Footnote 55: Visits to Hades or Hell (Põrgu) are common in the
_Kalevipoeg_ and in the popular tales, some of which we shall afterwards
notice.]

[Footnote 56: The term "Lett," which the Kalevide himself afterwards
applies to the demon, seems to be used in contempt; otherwise the
passage in the text might have been taken as equivalent to our
old-fashioned expression, "It's all Greek to me."]

[Footnote 57: Usually the devil's mother (or grandmother) is represented
as a white mare. Compare Canto 14 of the _Kalevipoeg_, and also the
story of the Grateful Prince.]

[Footnote 58: This Air-Maiden, who seems to be only a mischievous
sprite, must not be confounded with Ilmatar, the creatrix of the world
in the first Runo of the _Kalevala_.]

[Footnote 59: Finn, the Irish hero, was once entrapped by a sorceress on
a similar pretext into plunging into an enchanted lake, which changed
him into an old man. (See Joyce's _Old Celtic Romances_, "The Chase of
Slieve Cullin.") The story is also related in one of Kenealy's
ballads.]




CANTO XI

THE LOSS OF THE SWORD


Next morning the Kalevide arose at dawn, and hurried on towards Lake
Peipus, clearing and levelling the country as he went. When he arrived
at the lake, there was no boat to be seen; so he girded himself, and
plunged into it at a point where it was too wide to see the opposite
shore, while the fish fled before him as he waded through.

On the shore opposite, a hideous sorcerer was hiding in the bushes. He
was as bristly as a wild boar, with wide mouth and small oblique
eyes.[60] He was well skilled in all magic; he could make the wind blow
from any quarter, could remove ill from one man to cast it on another,
and could cause quarrels between the best friends. He had evil demons at
his beck and call; but for all that, he could cure all hurts and
diseases when he pleased. But to-day he was in a bad humour, and blew a
tremendous storm against the son of Kalev. Presently he saw a human form
struggling through the waters, which reached to his girdle. Even at four
or five miles' distance the figure seemed as large as a man, and he
appeared to be heavily laden. Sometimes the water hid him from view, but
as he came nearer the form became ever huger and more terrible.

The Kalevide laughed at the raging storm, and said to the lake, "You
nasty little puddle, you're wetting my girdle." He had taken scarcely an
hour in his passage, when he reached the firm ground, carrying a load of
planks which a horse or a pair of oxen could hardly have dragged along.
He had brought them from Pleskau to build a refuge for his people; over
twenty dozen planks, three inches thick, an ell broad, and ten yards
long. He drew his sword to trim the timber, and the sorcerer determined
to reward himself for his late exertions in raising the tempest by
possessing himself of it; but this was not the time for action, and he
slunk deeper into the shades of the forest.

The Kalevide was tired with his journey, and found a level place some
little distance from the shore, so he brought a lapful of shingle from
the beach and a quantity of sand, and made himself a comfortable bed in
a dry spot. Then he refreshed himself with bread and milk from his
wallet, loosed his girdle, laid his sword beside him, and soon fell
asleep, with his head to the west and his feet to the east, that the
first rays of the morning sun might shine in his eyes and awaken him.
Presently the ground shook, and the woods re-echoed, and the billows of
the lake rose in answer to his snoring, which sounded like the
Thunder-God driving three-in-hand through the clouds.

The sorcerer now stole from his hiding-place, and advanced towards the
sleeping giant with catlike steps; but he tried in vain to steal the
good sword from its master's side by his incantations. Neither commands
nor supplications would avail, and he was forced to use stronger spells.
So he scattered rowan-leaves, thyme, fern, and other magic herbs over
the sword, and at last it inclined towards the sorcerer, and he took it
in his arms. The huge weapon weighed him to the ground, and he was only
able to struggle along painfully under its weight, step by step, with
the sweat pouring from his face; but still he would not relinquish his
booty. Presently he came to the brook Käpä, and jumped over it; but the
sword slipped from his arm, and sank in the mud in the deepest place. He
renewed his incantations, but was now quite unable to repossess himself
of the sword, and on the approach of dawn he fled into the forest, to
hide from the vengeance of its owner.

When the Kalevide awoke, he rubbed the sleep out of his eyes and felt
for his sword, but it had disappeared. He could see its traces where it
had been dragged away, and he followed on its track, calling to the
sword as to a brother, and beseeching it to answer him, and not to let
him search in vain. But there was no reply, and then he tried a song,
but still there was no reply, and he searched everywhere for the sword,
till at last he saw it shining at the bottom of the water.

Then the Kalevide asked the sword who had stolen it and sunk it in the
water, and the sword sang in reply how the sorcerer had carried it off,
and how it had slipped from his grasp into the water, into the embraces
of the fairest of the water-nymphs. The Kalevide answered, "Does my
sword prefer to lie in the arms of a water-nymph rather than to feel the
grasp of a hero in battle?" The sword reminded the Kalevide of the
terrible murder in Finland, which it declared it could never forget, and
the hero abandoned the weapon to its sweet repose, saying that he relied
on his own strength to overcome his enemies in battle. But he laid his
commands on the sword that if any heroes of his race, Kalevides,
Alevides, or Sulevides, should come to the spot, then the sword should
address them in words. If a great singer came, the sword was to sing to
him; if a hero as brave and as strong as the Kalevide himself should
come to the brook, then the sword was to rise from its bed and join him;
but if the man himself who had brought the sword there should come that
way, then the sword was to cut off both his feet.

By this he meant the sorcerer, but he expressed himself ambiguously.

The son of Kalev then left the brook, took the boards on his back, and
set out for home. On his journey he passed through a pine forest which
belonged to men, a leafy forest sacred to women, and a hazel thicket,
the last refuge of the maidens, the orphans, and the sick. Here his foot
touched something soft, which he found to be a man of about the stature
of our present race, who was quaking with fear and besought his
protection. The Kalevide took him up kindly by the hair, and dropped him
into his wallet, where he fell as down a deep precipice, till he came to
a stop among the bread and herrings at the bottom. Then the hero asked
him what had frightened him so much.

Up from the bottom of the bag came a voice like the croaking of
a frog from the bottom of a deep well, and this was the man's
story:--"Yesterday evening I was wandering on the shores of Lake Peipus,
and lost my way. Presently I came to a footpath which led me to a poor
hut, where I thought to find a night's lodging. I came into a great
empty room, where an old woman was standing by the hearth preparing
supper. She was cooking half a pig in a great pot with peas, and kindly
gave me a cupful, but told me to eat my supper quick. As soon as I had
finished, she told me to hide among the straw which she had laid under
the table, and to lie as still as a mouse, for if I only moved a finger
after her sons returned, they would be sure to kill me. I thanked the
good old woman, and crept into the straw, where three men could easily
have hidden themselves; and I hoped to sleep. But presently I heard
steps approaching which shook the house; and whether or not it was my
fear that makes me think so, I fancy, noble scion of the Kalevides, that
even your heavy tread never made such a noise.

"The two brothers rushed into the room like wild bears, and one of them
sniffed about the room and said, 'Mother, who has been here? I smell
man's sweat.' 'Nobody has even been near the house to-day, my son,'
answered the old woman. 'If you smell anything, you must have brought
the smell with you from out of doors.'

"Then she gave them their supper, and they ate as much as would have
satisfied fifty of our race, and left something over. Then they laid
themselves down on the hard floor, one on each side the table, while the
old woman crept cautiously up the ladder to her couch above the stove.

"Poor wretch that I am! if I had ever expected to find myself in such a
position, I would rather have drowned myself in the lake or thrown
myself over a precipice. I could not sleep a wink all night, and when
the old woman opened the door in the morning I crept behind her, and
fled through two woods till I reached the third, where you found me."

This was the poor man's story, and the Kalevide laughed heartily at the
recital.

[Footnote 60: This is a well-known Mongol characteristic; and it is
rather oddly attributed by Arabic writers to the Jinn. "Two of them
appeared in the form and aspect of the Jarm, each with one eye slit
endlong, and jutting horns and projecting tusks."--Story of
Tohfat-el-Kulub (_Thousand and One Nights_, Breslau edition).]




CANTO XII

THE FIGHT WITH THE SORCERER'S SONS


As the Kalevide proceeded on his way, carrying his heavy load of planks,
the sorcerer's three sons rushed upon him from an ambush close to a high
waterfall which foams over steep rocks. He had been walking quietly
along, and the man in his wallet had fallen comfortably asleep. The
villains sprang upon the hero from behind, armed with slender young
birch-trees and dry pine-trunks. Two of them carried long whips, the
handle formed of strong beech-wood, and the lash armed with a great
millstone, with which they belaboured the hero unmercifully. He had just
armed himself with a huge club, in case he should be assaulted in
passing through the wood. It was a great pine-trunk from which he had
broken the crown. It was five-and-thirty ells long, and two feet thick
at the thick end, and with this he could defend himself as with a
sword.

The Kalevide tried at first to remonstrate with his assailants, but as
they continued to annoy him he rushed upon them with his club. The pine
club was soon splintered, the fragments flying in all directions, and
then the Kalevide defended himself with the planks which he was
carrying, and at every blow he smashed one on the backs of his enemies.
Presently his load was nearly exhausted, and the sorcerer's sons, hoping
now for an easy victory, pressed him more hardly, when suddenly he heard
a little voice crying from the bushes, "Dear son of Kalev, strike them
with the edges!"[61] The hero at once took the hint, and, instead of
striking with the flat side of the planks, began to strike with the
sharp edges, and his enemies soon fled before him, howling like wolves.
If the savages had not been thoroughly hardened by long exposure to heat
and cold by day and night, he would have left them dead on the field.

The Kalevide sat down to rest after the battle, and called to his dear
brother, who had aided him, to show himself. But his friend answered
that he could not venture out into the open, for he was only a poor
naked little hedgehog. So the hero called to him to come, and he would
clothe him. The hedgehog crept out of his warm nest, naked and
shivering, and the hero cut a piece from the lining of his own coat, and
gave it to the hedgehog, who joyfully wrapped himself in the warm
covering. But the piece was not large enough to cover him entirely, and
his legs and belly remained naked as before.

The Kalevide now wanted to sleep, but he was in the midst of a swamp. He
therefore fetched a load of sand from the distant sandhills, to make
himself a bed. He then felt into his bag for something to eat, when his
thumb came against the cold stiff body of his little friend, who had
been killed in his sleep by a chance blow during the fight, without
having had time to cry out or move a limb. He was much grieved at the
untimely death of his _protégé_, and dug him a grave with his own hands,
round which he planted berry-bearing bushes. Then he ate his supper and
fell asleep, to dream of the events of the past day.

While he was asleep, the sorcerer himself crept to his side, and by his
spells and incantations, and the use of magic herbs, threw him into a
deep slumber, which lasted for days and nights. Presently a messenger
came in haste to summon the king, and the cup-bearer directed him to
Lake Peipus; but no one had seen or heard anything of him.

On a fine summer's day, the people flocked from all parts of the country
to the sacred hill of Taara for a great festival, and as yet there came
no news of the king. Summer faded into autumn, and the Kalevide still
slept on, but he was dreaming of a new sword, much better than the uncle
of his father Kalev had forged for him, which was forged in an
underground smithy.

This sword had been forged by the pupils of Ilmarine[62] in a workshop
in the interior of a great mountain at the middle point of the earth,
the peak of which was lost in the clouds. Seven strong smiths wrought it
with copper hammers, the handles of which were of silver, and one of
their company turned it on the fire or laid it on the anvil with tongs
of the purest silver, while Ilmarine himself watched every stroke of the
hammers.

Presently a young man entered, pale and covered with blood, and he only
touched his cap without further salutation, and cried out to the workmen
not to waste the sword on the murderous son of Kalev, who could slay his
best friends in his rage. The Kalevide tried to cry out that it was
false, but the son of the old Tühja[63] oppressed him with a nightmare,
and he could not utter a word; he felt as if a mountain lay upon his
breast, and the sweat ran from his face.

On the following morning the Kalevide awoke from his sleep. He knew that
the vision of the smithy was a dream, but he was not aware that he had
slept for seven weeks without intermission. He found that his planks
were nearly all destroyed, and determined to fetch a fresh load from
Pleskau.

When he came to the lake, he heard a boy shouting for help. It was a
herd-boy, whose favourite lamb was being carried off by a wolf. He
killed the wolf with a stone,[64] and then stood by the lake considering
what to do next. Presently he decided to build a bridge across the
"puddle;" and built it out into the lake for perhaps a couple of miles,
when a great storm arose and swept away the unfinished structure. When
he saw his work destroyed, he said, "Why didn't I wade straight through,
as I did before, instead of wasting my time like this?" So he caught a
supply of crayfish, which he roasted and ate, and then set out on his
journey through the water.

On the shores of Lake Peipus lived a poor orphan boy, who had lost all
dear to him by famine, pestilence, and war, and who was now compelled to
slave as herd-boy for a hard mistress,[65] and to mind the children as
well as to look after the sheep and goats. He sang sad songs, till at
length the wood-nymph took compassion on him, and sang to him one
evening from the summit of an oak-tree, telling him that good luck would
be his in the morning. Next morning he found a lark's egg hidden among
leaves, which he hid in his bosom next his heart wrapped in wool and a
strip of linen. A mouse was hatched from it, which he fostered in the
same way till it became a kitten, a puppy, a lamb, and at length a
sheep[66] with fine white wool, and the sheep was so dear to the boy
that he left off weeping and lamenting, and always felt happy and
contented, though his lot was still a hard one.

[Footnote 61: This reminds us of the help given to Hiawatha by the
woodpecker during his fight with Megissogwun; but the one incident can
hardly be copied from the other. _Hiawatha_ was published some years
before the _Kalevipoeg_.]

[Footnote 62: This is the only passage in the _Kalevipoeg_ in which one
of the heroes of the _Kalevala_ is personally introduced.]

[Footnote 63: Emptiness; probably the Contemptible One; a name often
used for one of the principal demons.]

[Footnote 64: The rock is still shown, bearing the imprints of the
hero's fingers, each cleft large enough to hold a man.]

[Footnote 65: This was the fate of Kullervo himself in the _Kalevala_.
Orphans, for whom much sympathy is expressed, constantly appear in
Esthonian tales. Compare p. 236 of the present volume.]

[Footnote 66: We have a similar series of transformations (mouse, cat,
dog, ass, buffalo) in the story of Noor Ed-Deen and Shes Ed-Deen in the
_Thousand and One Nights_.]




CANTO XIII

THE KALEVIDE'S FIRST JOURNEY TO HADES


On the Kalevide's homeward journey he slept for a night at the place
where his sword had been stolen, and set out early next morning, making
his way through bush and brake. He walked on till sunset with his load
of planks without stopping to rest, and then ate his supper and prepared
himself a bed of sand as usual. When he awoke in the morning, a magpie
informed him for the first time that the sorcerer had kept him in a
magic sleep for seven weeks, and he quickened his pace. But when he
reached Lake Ilma he found it, to his disgust, too deep to wade through,
and he was compelled to go round it.

Presently he encountered an old witch, a relative of the sorcerer who
had done him so much harm already, sitting among the bushes and singing
magic songs. The hero stopped to rest himself, for the day was very
warm, and listened to her song, which was a long charm against
snake-bites. Then he walked on till noon, when he took a siesta,
breaking down trees of all kinds to make himself a couch. Afterwards he
turned to the left in the direction of Lake Endla, and towards evening
he came to the entrance of a cavern, before which a great fire was
burning. A huge caldron hung over it by heavy iron chains, just opposite
the entrance to the cavern, and three fellows were standing round, who
grinned and whispered to each other as the stranger approached.

The Kalevide threw down the planks and asked the men what they had got
in the caldron, and whether they were getting ready for a feast or a
wedding. They replied that the caldron cooked for everybody, and that
when they made a feast they killed a great ox. It took a hundred men to
kill it, five hundred to bleed it, and a thousand to cleanse it.[67] But
to-day they were only cooking for poor people; only half an elk, the
ribs of an old boar, the lungs and liver of a bear, the suet of a young
wolf, the hide of an old bear, and an egg from an eagle's nest. Old
Sarvik[68] and the old mother were to dine from it; the cat and dog were
to get their share, and the rest was to be divided among the cooks and
workmen; but the old mother was going to bake cakes for the young
ladies' dinner.

The Kalevide expressed his disgust at such cookery, but they told him it
was good enough for witches and sorcerers, and he then asked them to
show him the way to their master's house, as he wished to pay his
respects to the family. They warned him that he might not escape easily;
but as he persisted, they directed him to the cavern, which he
immediately entered, while the demons laughed, saying that the bear had
fallen into the trap and the lion[69] into the net, and that he was
carrying his hide to market for nothing.

The cave was so dark and narrow that the hero soon found himself obliged
to creep on all fours, and to grope his way. At last he perceived a
faint light at a distance, and the cavern enlarged so much that he could
now stand upright again.

Where the roof rose highest, a heavy lamp hung by chains from the
ceiling, and beyond it were great folding-doors. On each side stood a
jar, one filled with a liquid as white as milk, and the other with a
liquid as black as pitch. Inside he could hear maidens spinning and
singing,[70] lamenting the happiness of their former lives, and hoping
that some deliverer might appear. Then he strove to force the door, but
it resisted all his efforts, so he sang a song in his softest tones,
telling how he had encountered four fair maidens gathering flowers in
the woods. The maidens sang back that he had come at a good time, for
all the family were out, and they directed him to dip his hands in the
dark liquid, which would give him magic strength; but if he wished to
moderate his strength, then to dip his hands in the white liquid, for
the dark liquid would give him strength to dash everything to pieces.

The hero dipped his hands in the dark liquid, and felt his strength
redoubled. He pushed against the door again, and the door and door-posts
too came thundering to the ground. The maidens fled into the adjoining
room, crying out to him not to approach them till he had dipped his
hands in the white liquid, which would remove the enchantment. He
laughed, and, notwithstanding their entreaties, followed them into the
next room, where he saw a naked sword, a small willow wand, and a ragged
old hat hanging on the wall. "Look," cried he joyfully, "this is the
sword which I saw forged for me in my dream!"

"Beware," said one of the maidens, "do not touch that sword, for it
belongs to Sarvik; but take the rod and the hat, for they are yours, and
you can work any wonders with them. Swords you can only obtain from the
smith himself."

But the Kalevide answered that he could have his will without the
wishing-rod and cap, which were only fit for witches and wizards. So the
maiden, who was anxious to convince him of the value of the treasures
which he despised, took down the hat from its peg. It was made of the
cuttings of finger-nails,[71] and she declared that there was not
another like it in the world, for it could fulfil every desire of its
possessor. So she put it on her head and said--

    "Raise thee, raise thee, golden[72] maiden,
    Blue-eyed maiden, raise thee, raise thee,
    Like unto the son of Kalev,
    Like unto thy friend in stature."

She began at once to grow taller, ell after ell, till she grew fully as
tall as the son of Kalev himself.

Then the Kalevide took the hat from her head and set it on his own,
wishing to become as small as she had been. His stature immediately
sank, ell after ell, till he was reduced to the size of an ordinary
man.[73] The young giantess took back the hat, and wished to resume her
former stature, which accordingly befell.

The Kalevide then said to the maiden that he would willingly remain a
little boy that day for her sake, but he was now anxious to keep the
hat, that he might at once resume his own stature and strength in case
of any sudden and unexpected danger. They sang and danced and sported to
their heart's content, and the maiden called her second sister, whose
duty it was to polish the gold, silver, and copper ware; and her third
sister, who tended the geese on the common; and the sisters locked and
bolted the kitchen door, for fear the old woman should hear the noise
and come to disturb their merriment.

The maidens were delighted, for though the Kalevide declared that he
could not think of marrying a wife himself, he would deliver them from
Hades next day, and would marry one to the son of Alev, one to the son
of Sulev, and one to the cup-bearer.[74] So they played all sorts of
games; the falcon-game, in which the hero was the falcon, and they were
the birds; kiss-in-the-ring, blind man's buff, &c. But whatever they
played at, the hero always got the best of the game. When they were
tired of this amusement, they put out all the lights.

[Footnote 67: We meet with this big ox elsewhere in the _Kalevipoeg_
(Canto 19), as well as in the _Kalevala_, Runo 20.]

[Footnote 68: Old Hornie, the name of the ruler of Põrgu (Hell).]

[Footnote 69: The word used for lion is "_lõwi_," undoubtedly derived
from the German. The Finns generally call the lion "_jalopeura_," which
also denotes the lynx.]

[Footnote 70: Compare the story of the Gold Spinners.]

[Footnote 71: We meet with a similar hat in other stories. Many
Esthonians and Lithuanians still hide their nail-parings as carefully as
possible, or else make a cross over them lest the devil should find them
and use them to make a wishing-hat. Can this hat have any connection
with the white straw hat of the devil in a Deptford rhyme?--Gomme's
_Traditional Games_, I. p. 4. In the Edda, we are told that Naglfar, the
largest ship in the world, which is to bring the giants to the fight at
Ragnarök, is similarly constructed, and as both gods and men wish that
it should be completed as late as possible, every one should be very
careful not to die with unpared nails, lest he should supply materials
for its construction.]

[Footnote 72: Golden is often used in Finnish and Esthonian, as in many
other languages, as a term of endearment.]

[Footnote 73: The maidens were afterwards married to the relatives of
the Kalevide, giants like himself, and are described as walking
arm-in-arm with them, nothing being then said of any difference in their
stature.]

[Footnote 74: This reminds us of a well-known feudal custom, more
honoured in the breach than in the observance, which also prevailed
among the old kings of Scotland for several reigns. The second sister
was ultimately married, not to the cup-bearer, but to the son of Olev.]




CANTO XIV

THE PALACE OF SARVIK


The sisters were sorry to see the dawn of day, though they were no
longer obliged to spin and weave, for the old woman was locked up in the
kitchen, and could not interfere with them. That day they amused
themselves by showing their guest all over the house, and all the
treasure-chambers, but they blushed and dropped their eyes whenever he
looked at themselves.

Presently they passed through a stone door into a stone gallery,
likewise paved with stone, and after passing through it for some little
distance, arrived at a room in which the walls and furniture were wholly
of iron. "This," said the eldest sister, "is the room of old Sarvik,
where his men-servants assemble and work or amuse themselves, and where
they are sometimes tortured in all sorts of ways."

They left this room through an iron archway which opened into a gallery
of iron, which they followed for some distance till they reached a
second room, entirely of copper, and with copper furniture. "This," said
the eldest sister again, "is old Sarvik's room, where the maids assemble
to work or amuse themselves, and where, too, they are punished and
tormented."

From this room they passed through a copper archway into a copper
gallery, which led them presently to a third room of silver, with silver
furniture and fittings, and the chests in the corners were filled with
silver coins. Then said the second sister, "This is old Sarvik's room,
where he spends most of his time, and where he sleeps and refreshes
himself."

They passed from this room into a silver gallery, which led them into a
room of gold, with gold fittings and furniture, and the chests in the
corners were filled with gold coins. "This," said the second sister
again, "is old Sarvik's room, where he feasts and amuses himself. I was
busy yesterday for hours sweeping this room and polishing up all the
gold."

From this room they went through a golden gallery to a fifth chamber,
which was of silk, and everything in it was silk. The walls were hung
with silken raiment, and the chests in the corners were filled with
silken stuffs. "This," said the youngest sister, "is the maidens' room,
where they deck themselves out in silk on gala days."

They passed through a silken gallery into a chamber of satin, of which
she gave a similar explanation. From this they passed to a lace chamber,
where the little girls decked themselves out.

The lace gallery from this room led them out into the enclosure, which
was paved with silver coins instead of grass.

Round the court stood seven storehouses, the first composed of a single
block of granite, the second of plates of iron, the third of hens' eggs,
the fourth of goose-eggs, the fifth of polished quartz, the sixth of the
finest eagles' eggs, and the seventh of eggs of the Siuru.[75]

The barns were filled respectively with rye, barley, oats, wheat,
maize, vegetables, and the last with lumps of lard and tallow.

At the back of the enclosure stood cattle-stalls, constructed of all
sorts of bones.

The Kalevide did not care to look at these things long, but asked the
sisters to tell him all they could about Sarvik.

"We can't tell you anything about his birth and parentage," answered the
eldest sister. "We don't know if a bear was his father and a wolf his
mother, or whether a mare suckled him and a goat rocked him in the
cradle.

"He has large estates, which occupy much of his time, and he makes long
journeys secretly in an incredibly short time; but no one has seen or
heard which way he goes or what places he visits. Everybody can see him
going out and coming in, but nothing further is known about his
movements. It is said that there is a vast space in the centre of the
earth where he rules over seven worlds; seven islands, very thickly
populated with the souls of the departed, where they live in large
villages, and are subject to old Sarvik, as the wisdom of Taara has
decreed from the beginning of the world.

"Sarvik rules his subjects with great severity; but once a year, on All
Souls' Day, they are permitted to revisit their homes, to see and salute
their friends and relatives. They rush up in shoals, on these occasions,
to the places which they once inhabited in joy or grief; but as soon as
their time is over they are compelled to return, each to his own
dwelling."

The second sister added, "Old Sarvik selects his workmen and maids from
this kingdom, and they are forced to follow him, and perform hard tasks
for him in the iron and copper chambers; and if they fail in anything,
they are beaten with bars of iron and rods of copper.

"This is Sarvik's abode, where he lives with his wife, and rests and
refreshes himself, and sleeps on soft pillows, when he is tired with
long journeys and knocking about. Then the old woman heats the bath for
him, and whisks his back and shoulders with the bath-whisk.[76]

"Sometimes he makes a great feast for his friends and relatives, when
they shout and drink beer till they are tipsy. His brother-in-law is
Tühi,[77] his mother is the bitch of Põrgu, and his grandmother is the
white mare."[78]

"We expect him back this evening from the upper world, for he does not
like to stay where the sun shines by day and the moon and stars by
night. But when he has anything to do in the under world, he stays away
from home for days and weeks together."

The third sister added, "Noble scion of the Kalevides, if Sarvik found
you among us here unawares, it would surely be your death, for no one
who passes the threshold of his abode ever sees the sun again. We, poor
creatures, were carried away as children from a country a thousand
versts distant, and have had to do the hardest work early and late. But
Taara mercifully decreed that we should always retain our youth as long
as we retained our innocence."

"But what avails it," interrupted the eldest sister, "when we are cut
off from all pleasure and happiness?"

Then the son of Kalev soothed and comforted them, assuring them that he
was strong enough to rescue them. He would fight Sarvik himself, and
overcome the old woman too. The eldest sister answered that if he really
wished to fight with Sarvik, he must make use of the rod and the hat;
for strength and bravery would avail nothing against Sarvik, who had
thousands of allies at his beck and call, and was lord of the winds and
of all kinds of magic spells.

But the Kalevide only laughed, and declared that he had fought with a
whole host of demons in Finland. Then the second sister implored him to
escape while there was yet time, and to wish himself away with the
wishing-hat; for as soon as Sarvik returned, all the doors would fly
back to their places behind him, and escape would become impossible. The
hero laughed again, proud of his strength, and the sisters, greatly
distressed, consulted how they could help him in spite of himself, by
some artifice.

Two glasses stood by Sarvik's bed, half filled with a magic liquor that
looked like beer. They looked just alike, but the liquor on the right
hand gave the strength of ten oxen, while that on the left produced
corresponding weakness. The eldest sister hastened to change these
glasses, while the second secured the wishing-rod.

As they returned, they heard the heavy footsteps of Sarvik approaching,
and the youngest sister again implored the hero to fly before it was too
late. Sarvik approached with a noise like hundreds of cavalry prancing
over a bridge, or heavy iron waggons thundering along a copper roadway.
The earth quaked and the cavern shook under his steps, but the hero
stood at the entrance:

    Like the oak-tree in the tempest,
    Or the red glow 'mid the cloudlets,
    Or the rock amid a hailstorm,
    Or a tower in windy weather.

Presently Sarvik dashed open the last door with a blow of his fist, and
stopped, confronting the intruder. The sisters shrank back pale and
trembling, but the Kalevide stood beside them, with the hat in his hand,
and apparently no taller than themselves. Sarvik asked who he was, and
how he came to throw himself into the trap; but the hero at once
challenged him to wrestle, and he accepted the challenge. Then Sarvik
advanced to the bed, not knowing that the glasses had been changed, and
drained the water of weakness to the very bottom. Meantime the Kalevide
concealed the magic hat in his bosom, so that he could at once resume
his former strength and stature in case of need.

The combatants then went to the enclosure to wrestle, but Sarvik sent
the eldest sister to the iron room to fetch a double chain with which
the victor might bind his conquered foe. Meantime the wrestling-place
was marked off with posts, so that all might be fair.

Now they rushed upon each other, and struggled together like waves in a
tempest or roofs in a storm. The whole underground kingdom trembled, the
palace walls cracked and their foundations heaved, the arches bowed and
the roof began to totter. The contest remained long undecided, but when
they paused to rest, the Kalevide drew out the hat, and wished to resume
his former size and strength. He grew up at once, as strong as an
oak-tree and as tall as a pine. He grasped Sarvik by the hair, raised
him up ten fathoms, and then rammed him into the ground like a pointed
stake, first to the calves, then to the knees, and then to the loins, so
that he could not move. He then grasped the chain to bind him, but
suddenly Sarvik grew smaller and smaller, and finally sank into the
ground out of sight, like a stone in a swamp.

The Kalevide shouted after him, upbraiding him for a coward, and
threatened to follow him up and fetter him some other day; but his
present care was to release the sisters from their long captivity. So he
seized and girded on the sword, took a load of old treasures, and many
bags full of gold coins, and barrels full of silver money. All this he
took on his shoulders and mounted the three sisters on the top. Then he
put on the hat, and cried out, "Hat, carry us quickly to the entrance
gate, where I left the planks." He found himself there at once, but the
cooks and the kettle had disappeared, and nothing was left behind but
the ashes of the fire, in which a few dying embers still remained. These
the hero fanned into a flame, into which he contemptuously tossed the
hat, which was immediately consumed.

The sisters began to cry, and reproached him with having destroyed a hat
which had not its equal on earth or in Põrgu, and said that all hope was
now at an end. But the hero comforted them, telling them that it was no
time for lamentation, for the summer was at its loveliest, and they
should soon find themselves in full possession of all the pleasures of
life, from which they had been so long debarred. So he took the planks
on his back, piled all his booty upon them, and then invited the sisters
to take their place again on the top of all. Before their departure, the
sisters had also provided themselves with good store of rich clothing
from the silk and satin chambers, while the youngest had secured the
wishing-rod in case of need.

Notwithstanding his load, the Kalevide ran on as if his feet were
burning, while the sisters jested and laughed and sang.

[Footnote 75: A mythical blue bird, the daughter of Taara. Two songs
respecting her will be found in another part of the book. Reinthal
improperly translates the word "griffin." "Phoenix" or "Seemurgh"
would have been a more appropriate rendering.]

[Footnote 76: These bath-whisks, which are dried birch-twigs with the
leaves left on, are often alluded to in the _Kalevala_.]

[Footnote 77: Or Tühja. See _ante_, p. 84.]

[Footnote 78: Compare Canto 10 of the _Kalevipoeg_, and the story of the
Grateful Prince, as well as _ante_, p. 58 note. Sarvik seems to have
belonged to the same family as the water-demon who was tricked by the
Alevide in Canto 10.]




CANTO XV

THE MARRIAGE OF THE SISTERS


The Kalevide had not gone far on his homeward journey when he found that
Tühi himself was pursuing him with a band of his followers. Then the
youngest sister took the wishing-rod, and called upon it to flood the
whole country, a bridge rising before them for the hero, while water
flowed behind between him and his enemies. The demons stopped in
confusion, and Tühi shouted to the Kalevide to ask if he was carrying
off his adopted daughters? "It looks like it," answered the hero.[79]
Then Tühi asked again, "Dear brother, did you wrestle with my good
brother-in-law in his own enclosure, and then drive him into the ground
like a post?" "Likely enough," retorted the hero; "but it's not my fault
if his bones are still sound." Then the demon asked again, "My dear
brother, son of Kalev, did you lock up our old mother in the kitchen
just like a mouse in a trap, while she was baking cakes?" "O yes," said
the hero; "and I suppose she roared, and made up a bed among the boxes
of peas, and for aught I know she may be sleeping there still, unless a
flea has woke her up." "Have you stolen Sarvik's good sword?" asked Tühi
again. "Perhaps I may have taken the weapon too, dear brother," answered
the hero. "Who can separate a man and his sword? One is worth nothing
without the other." Then Tühi asked if he had taken the hat. "I think
so," said the hero; "but Sarvik will never put it on his head again, for
I threw it into the fire and burned it to ashes, which have blown away
in the wind." Tühi then asked if he had plundered his brother's
treasures. "Yes, my dear sir," answered the hero; "I took a little gold
and silver, but not much. Ten horses could drag such a load, and twenty
oxen easily; but you may depend upon it I didn't carry away any copper."
Tühi's next question was whether he had stolen the bridge-builder, the
wishing-rod. The hero replied, "I suppose some brown-eyed maiden stole
it, for no stronger person would have troubled about such a thing." Tühi
next inquired how he had treated the maidens; and to this the hero
replied that he'd tell him another time. "Won't you come back again,
dear brother, and pay your debts?" asked Tühi at last. "Who knows, dear
brother?" said the hero; "if I ever find myself short of money, I may
perchance come back to fetch some more gold and silver, and repay my old
debts with new ones." And upon this Tühi and his seventy people decamped
in the greatest haste, as if they had been on fire, or as if they were
pursued by gadflies.

Strong as was the Kalevide, his back was weary and chafed with his heavy
load, and he threw it off and lay down to rest; but while he slept he
was in danger of being carried away by a sudden flood from the
mountains, raised against him by a sorceress.[80] After stemming it with
some trouble, on resuming his journey, he met a stranger who asked him
what he was going to do with the planks. The stranger proved to be the
son of Olev, the great master-builder, and to him was intrusted the task
of building the cities and fortifications.

When the Kalevide learned that he had lost seven weeks in a magic sleep,
he gave the three sisters to the charge of the son of Alev, who married
the youngest. The son of Sulev married the eldest, but the second sister
found no lover, and while the others were talking together of their
wedded happiness she stole apart weeping; and at length she was carried
away by a famous sorcerer, and her strong brothers-in-law went in search
of her. On the third evening they came upon her track, when the sorcerer
spread out a great lake to impede their passage. But the Alevide had
brought with him the wishing-rod, which quickly provided them with a
bridge. They rushed across, broke the locks, and burst open the doors,
slew the sorcerer, released the captive, and then sent the red cock on
the roof.[81]

Then the son of Olev took the second sister to wife; and thus all the
three sisters whom the Kalevide had released from the regions of Sarvik
were happily married, and many great tribes derived their origin from
them.

[Footnote 79: Compare the similar scene in the story of "Slyboots,"
later in this volume.]

[Footnote 80: This incident resembles an adventure attributed to Thor.
In the legends of all countries, sorcerers or fugitives are represented
as raising magic floods, either to sweep away their enemies or to baffle
pursuit. There are three instances in this very canto.]

[Footnote 81: This is the usual Esthonian euphemism for setting a house
on fire. I understand that there is also some connection between red
cocks and fire in Scottish folk-lore; and in Scandinavian mythology two
of the three cocks which are to crow before Ragnarök are red. May they
not have some connection with the fire of Surtur?]




CANTO XVI

THE VOYAGE OF THE KALEVIDE


The Kalevide now decided on a journey north, to the uttermost end of the
world, where it touches the sky. He imagined that he could only reach
this point by sea, and thought at first of travelling on the wings of an
eagle. Meantime, a raven directed him, when he came to a broad expanse
of blue water, to look for a place where rushes grew on the bank, and to
stamp on the ground with his right foot, when the mouth of the earth and
the strongly guarded doors would fly open, and he would reach the end of
the world.

Then the Kalevide reflected how he had waded through every lake and sea,
and had found none too deep for him except Lake Ilma. He then thought he
would visit Finland, Norway, and the islands, where he expected to find
old friends to direct him on his journey. So he directed Olev to fell
the great oak-tree which their father and mother had planted, and which
neither sun, moon, stars, nor rain, could penetrate,[82] and to make the
strongest sailing vessels for exploring voyages from the trunk, warships
from the crown, merchantmen from the large branches, slave-ships from
the smaller ones, children's boats from the splinters, and maiden's
boats from the chips. He ordered the remainder to be used for building
towns, fortresses, and houses for the people in various parts of the
country.

Olev replied, "I know what to do, dear brother, if we can find a strong
man in the country able to fell the oak-tree." The raven told them to
send out to seek for such a man, and they did so; whereupon the wise men
of Norway and Finland assembled to give them advice. But they told the
Kalevide that it was no use building a wooden ship to sail to the
world's end, for the spirits of the Northern Lights would set it in
flames. He must build a strong vessel of iron and copper and tin.

The Kalevide then constructed a vessel, not of iron and copper, but of
silver. The whole of the ship--planking, deck, masts, and chains--was of
silver, and he named the vessel Lennuk.[83] For himself he provided
golden armour, silver for the nobles, iron for the crew, copper for the
old men, and steel for the wise men.

The Kalevide selected experienced sailors and many wise men to accompany
him, and they set sail joyfully towards Finland; but soon turned, and
directed their course to the far north, in the direction of the Great
Bear.

To the north they sailed under the guidance of a wise helmsman who knew
all languages and the speech of birds and beasts. But the Finnish
sorcerers raised storms against the ship, and they were driven along for
seven days and nights, till a coast rose before them which the helmsman
declared was quite unknown to him. The son of Kalev then sprang into the
sea, swam ashore, and towed the ship after him.[84] The birds sang to
them that it was the poverty-stricken coast of Lapland.[85] They went
to explore the country, but wandered a long way without meeting with any
inhabitants. At last they found a solitary cottage, where a maiden sat
on the grass plot before the door spinning. And she sang how a milkmaid
once found a cock and a hen. The cock flew away, but she caught the hen,
and brought it home, where it grew up into a proud princess who had many
lovers, among whom were the sun and--"The Kalevide," shouted he; and the
maiden screamed and fled into the house. Then her father came to the
door, and the Kalevide saluted him courteously, and asked him the way to
the world's end. The wise man answered that it was a vain quest. The sea
had no end, and those who had formerly attempted this quest had found
their deaths on the Fire Island. The raven had only directed them on the
road to Põrgu, but if they wished to return home, he would be pleased to
guide them.

The Kalevide answered that he needed no pilot to show him the way home,
but would be glad if the Lapp could pilot him to the door at the World's
End. The Lapp consented, but bargained for what was chained to the wall
at home, which the hero readily promised.

So Varrak the Laplander took the helm and steered the vessel due north
for many days and nights. The first danger they encountered was a great
whirlpool,[86] which threatened to engulf the ship. Then Varrak threw a
small barrel overboard, wrapped in red cloths and ornamented with red
streamers. This bait was swallowed by a whale, which took to flight, and
towed the ship to a place of safety.

Again they sailed on for a long distance, till they came in sight of the
Island of Fire,[87] where huge pillars of flame were towering up, and
vast clouds of smoke filled the air. The Kalevide wished to visit the
island, but Varrak warned him of the danger, and at length the Sulevide
volunteered to land alone. So Varrak ran the ship ashore at a spot where
one mountain was casting up flames, a second smoke, and a third boiling
water, while the burning lava ran down into the valley.

The son of Sulev wandered on amid ashes and snowfields, amid a rain of
red-hot stones, till he reached the mouth of the volcano, when his coat
caught fire and his hair and eyebrows were singed, and he returned
scorched to the ship. The Kalevide asked if he had seen anything of the
cupbearer, who had followed him; but he had not. Then a white bird
perched on the ship, and the wise Finn, who knew the language of
animals, asked for tidings of the boy. But the bird answered that he had
wandered away to a beautiful country which lay behind the
snow-mountains, where he was enjoying himself in the company of the
water-nymphs. He would return no more; let the ship proceed on her
course.[88]

Next they reached a country where the birds all fed on gold and silver
and copper, and where the herbage grew as high as the pine-trees. The
Kalevide sent some of the crew ashore, under the guidance of the
magician, to view the country, while he and the Sulevide lay down on
deck to sleep in the sun, leaving the Alevide to keep watch.

The ship's company, headed by the magician, wandered into the country,
and, when night came, lay down to rest under a bush. Next morning the
little daughter of a giant[89] found them asleep, and wondering what
they were, put them all into her apron, and carried them home to her
father, and scattered them before him, saying:

    "Look at these, O dearest father,
    I have brought them here to play with,
    For I found them in the cabbage,
    Where the six like fleas were lying,
    Stiffened in the chilly dewdrops,
    Sleeping 'neath a head of cabbage."

The giant[90] wished to test the wisdom of the strangers, so he
inquired, "What walks along the grass, steps on the edge of the fence,
and walks along the sides of the reeds?" "The bee," replied the
magician.[91] "What drinks from the brooks and wells, and from the
stones on the bank?" "The rainbow." "What comes hissing from the
meadow, and rushing from the blue forest?" "The rain." The giant was
pleased with the answers to his riddles, and told his daughter to carry
the men back to where she had found them, but the wise man asked her to
take them to the ship for fun. The maiden willingly obeyed; she leaned
over the ship like a vast cloud, shook the men out of her apron on deck,
and then blew the ship four miles out to sea, for which the Kalevide
shouted back his thanks to her.

Now they sailed farther north, and the cold became intense, while the
spirits of the Northern Lights began their combats in the air with
silver spears and golden shields. The sailors were frightened, but the
Kalevide was pleased that they should now be able to direct their course
when they had left the sun and moon behind them.

Next they reached an unknown shore, where the inhabitants were half men
and half dogs, and had long dog's tails.[92] They were armed with great
clubs, and the Kalevide sprang ashore to fight. A horse which he
mounted soon fell dead under him, but he tore up an oak by the roots and
began to lay the country waste. The wisest man of the country
expostulated with him, and he repented of his violence, and prayed to
Ukko to send fish to the country to replace the good ground which he had
destroyed in his fury. Peace was thus concluded; and the wise man told
the Kalevide that the raven had sent him on an idle quest to the gates
of Põrgu. The Kalevide then decided to return home, and they directed
the ship towards Lalli in the bay of Lindanisa, where Olev was building
a city.

[Footnote 82: Here we have the great oak-tree mentioned in Cantos 5 and
6 reappearing in another connection.]

[Footnote 83: The Flyer.]

[Footnote 84: In the present canto the Kalevide is never spoken of as of
gigantic size, unless we may consider feats like this as implying it.]

[Footnote 85: Baring Gould considers this country to be the North Cape,
but the geography of the voyage is confused.]

[Footnote 86: The Maelström?]

[Footnote 87: The commentators identify this island with Iceland, but
the voyagers were apparently on the wrong side of Scandinavia to reach
either the Maelström or Iceland. Still we have both geysers and
volcanoes in the text.]

[Footnote 88: Here the Kalevide's sun begins to decline, for the first
of his faithful companions leaves his side, as Hylas left Heracles.]

[Footnote 89: This is Chamisso's Alsatian legend, "Das Riesenspielzeug,"
"The Giant's Toy," usually called in English translations "The Giant's
Daughter and the Peasant." The girl in the poem seems to have far
exceeded even the Kalevide in stature; and we may remember Gulliver's
remark respecting the Brobdingnagians--"Who knows but that even this
prodigious race of mortals might be equally overmatched in some distant
part of the world whereof we have yet no discovery?"]

[Footnote 90: Throughout this passage the giant is usually called simply
the magician, and the other "the wise man."]

[Footnote 91: Asking riddles of this kind was a common amusement in
Northern Europe. Compare Prior's _Danish Ballads_, i. 185, 334.]

[Footnote 92: Baring-Gould ingeniously suggests that this country is
Greenland, and that the Dog-men are Esquimaux, clad in furs, and riding
in dog-sledges. The end of this canto is inconsequential, for the hero
should have reached his goal during this voyage, not by a land-journey
afterwards.]




CANTO XVII

THE HEROES AND THE DWARF


Olev had now built a magnificent city, fortified with towers and
ditches, around the burial-mound of Kalev. Large numbers of people
flocked to it, and the Kalevide named it Lindanisa, in memory of his
mother.[93] Other fortified cities were founded by the Alevide and the
Sulevide.

But news came that hostile troops were landing on the coast, and the
Kalevide mounted his war-horse. The king wore a golden helmet, gold
spurs, and a silver belt, and carried a shield of gold, and the steed
was all caparisoned with gold and silver and pearls, while the maidens
of the country looked on with admiration.

The Kalevide and his three friends fought a pitched battle with the
countless forces of the enemy on the plains of Esthonia. Their heads
fell before him like autumn leaves, and their scattered limbs were
strewn about in heaps like straw or rushes. His horse waded in blood and
bones to the belly; for the Kalevide slaughtered his enemies by tens of
thousands, and would have utterly annihilated them, but, as he was
pursuing the fugitives over hill and dale, his horse lost his footing in
a bog, and was engulfed in the morass.

As the Kalevide was unable to continue the pursuit after the loss of his
horse, he recalled his troops and divided the booty. Then he sent his
soldiers to carry news of the victory to the towns and villages
throughout the country, and he and his three friends set out on a
journey across the plains and swamps, and through primeval forests,
making a pathway for others as they advanced. At length they came to a
place where smoke and flames were shooting up into the air, and when
they reached the spot they found an old woman sitting at the mouth of a
cave and stirring the fire under a pot. The Alevide asked what she was
cooking, and she answered, "Cabbage for my sons and for myself." Then
the son of Sulev said they were hungry travellers, and asked her to give
them some, and to take a rest while they finished the cookery. The old
woman consented, but warned them, if a strange youth asked to be allowed
to taste the broth, to take good care that he did not empty the pot and
leave them nothing. Three of the heroes at once volunteered to take
turns to watch the pot, but the Kalevide said nothing. Then the old
woman crept into the bushes, and hid herself in a wolf's den.

The Alevide took the first watch, and his companions lay down by the
fire to sleep. He had not been long sitting there, and throwing fresh
faggots on the fire, when one of the little dwarf race stole up
stealthily and timidly through the long grass. He was about three spans
high, and had a gold bell[94] hanging to his neck. He had small horns
behind the ears, and a goat's beard under his chin. He asked humbly to
be allowed to taste the soup, and the hero gave him leave, but warned
him to take care not to drown himself in it.

The dwarf replied that he would like to taste the soup without a spoon,
and jumped on the edge of the pot; but he grew up in an instant to the
height of a pine-tree, and then to the clouds, rising to the height of
seventy fathoms and more. Then he vanished like a mist, and the Alevide
found the pot as empty as if the contents had been scraped out.[95] So
he refilled the pot with water, put in some fresh cabbage, and roused
the Olevide, but said nothing of what had happened. Then he lay down and
went to sleep, leaving his companion on guard. But presently the dwarf
reappeared, and neither the Olevide nor the Sulevide, who took the third
watch, fared any better than their companion.

The watch now fell to the Kalevide, but he would not allow the dwarf to
taste the soup until he gave him his gold bell as a pledge of good
faith. As soon as he had received it, he playfully gave the dwarf a
fillip on the forehead, when there was a tremendous crash of thunder,
and the dwarf sank into the earth and disappeared from the sight of the
hero. The other heroes and the old woman then assembled round the fire
to hear what had happened. They sat down to their supper, after which
the Kalevide advised his companions to lie down and rest for the
remainder of the night, and to return home to their wives and children
in the morning. During the night the daughters of the Meadow Queen
danced and sported, and sang to the Kalevide of his approaching
adventures and journey.

[Footnote 93: Linda's bosom, now Revel.]

[Footnote 94: The bells of the dwarfs are often of great importance in
Northern fairy mythology.]

[Footnote 95: This incident is common in Esthonian tales.]




CANTO XVIII

THE KALEVIDE'S JOURNEY TO PÕRGU


Next morning the Kalevide rose at daybreak and looked about him. Where
the dwarf had vanished in blue smoke, he now beheld a sheet of blue
water with rushes on the bank, and knew that he had unexpectedly chanced
upon the entrance to Põrgu. His wearied comrades were still sleeping,
and, without disturbing them, he stamped with his right foot, and the
hidden strongly-guarded doors of Hades flew open.

The hero gazed down into the abyss, but clouds of smoke and hot steam
rolled up, and made his eyes smart, and he hesitated a moment, when a
raven called to him from the summit of a pine-tree to sound the bell.
Instantly the clouds of smoke disappeared, and he set out on the
downward path. As he proceeded, he found himself in thick darkness,
without a ray of light to guide him, and he was forced to grope his
way, when the voice of a mouse directed him to sound the bell again. The
path grew dimly light, and the Kalevide proceeded, but soon found his
way so much impeded by nets and snares, which multiplied faster than he
could destroy them, that he was unable to advance, and his strength
began to fail him. This time it was a toad who advised him to sound the
bell, when all the magic snares vanished, and he hurried on till he
reached the edge of a rivulet about two spans broad. Every time he
attempted to cross, his foot sank in the mud in the middle, and no
matter how often he renewed his efforts, he could not reach the opposite
shore. While the Kalevide was lamenting that he found less difficulty in
crossing Lake Peipus with a heavy load of timber on his back, he heard a
crayfish advising him to sound the bell, when the brook instantly
vanished.

There was nothing in these caverns to mark the difference between night
and day, and the Kalevide did not know how long he had been struggling
against the various difficulties of the road. He was now assailed by
swarms of mosquitoes, which he thought to escape by hurrying through
them and leaving them behind; but they grew thicker and thicker, till a
cricket in the grass called to him to sound the bell. The mosquitoes
vanished as if carried away by the wind, and the hero sat down to rest
and refresh himself, and having at length learned wisdom from
experience, tied the bell on his little finger, that he might have its
constant aid in future. Then he advanced farther.

And now the hosts of hell, the servants of Sarvik, heard his heavy
tread, and they sent out scouts, who fled back in consternation,
reporting that the son of Kalev, the strongest of men, was advancing
with hostile intentions. Then Sarvik commanded his forces to march
against him.

The Kalevide had now reached a river of blazing pitch, crossed by an
iron bridge. Here the hosts of hell determined to make a stand, and
formed themselves into four detachments, one upon the bridge, one below,
one on the bank, and one in the rear.

"What's this swarm of frogs?" cried the Kalevide, drawing his sword and
rushing forward to the bridge. He was at once assailed with a shower of
arrows, and was then attacked with spear and battleaxe; but he stood
like a wall of iron, and scattered his enemies, though fresh hosts
continually advanced against him. At length he fought his way through
all the hostile troops, and Sarvik was in despair, and did his utmost to
block the paths and to fortify himself against the imminent danger.

When the Kalevide reached the bridge, he rested for a moment to look
round, and then casting the bodies of his enemies into the river as he
advanced, his steps thundered across the bridge, and he soon reached the
fortifications. Three strokes of his fist sufficed to burst in the
gates, and he trod down all impediments and forced his way into the
enclosure. When he came to the inner door, he beat and kicked it down,
and it fell in fragments, door, door-posts, bolts, and bars, all
battered to pieces. In the hall he found a shade resembling his mother
Linda spinning. At her right hand was a cup of the water of strength,
and at her left a cup of the water of weakness. Without speaking, she
offered her son the cup with the water of strength, which he drank, and
then lifting a huge rock broke his way into the inner hall, where
Sarvik's old mother was sitting spinning. She knew, and tried to beg the
bell, but the Kalevide put her off, and inquired if Sarvik was at home.
She answered that he left home the day before yesterday, and would not
return for two or three days; but if the hero liked to wait for him, he
should be received as a guest; but first he must taste her mead. He knew
that she would give him the water of weakness, and declined, but looked
about till he saw a secret door in a recess in the wall, and was about
to break it open, when it flew open of itself with a tremendous noise,
and a host of armed warriors rushed out. He repulsed them all, and then
Sarvik himself cried out to him, reproaching him with all the wrongs he
had suffered at his hands, and the numerous thefts he had committed. In
reply the Kalevide reproached Sarvik with his own tricks; but
nevertheless he sheathed his sword and put the bell in his pocket.

Then Sarvik came forth from his hiding-place pale and trembling, and
wishing to recover himself a little by a potion, mistook the cups in his
confusion, and drank the water of weakness, while the Kalevide took
another draught of the water of strength.




CANTO XIX

THE LAST FEAST OF THE HEROES


After this the Kalevide and Sarvik engaged in a terrific
wrestling-match, which lasted for seven days and nights, with varying
success. At length the shade of Linda, who was looking on, took her
distaff, swung it ten times round her head, and dashed it to the ground.
The hint was not lost on her son. He seized Sarvik by the garters,
whirled him ten times round, and then hurled him down, set his knee on
his chest, and seized his throat and tried to strangle him. Then he took
his belt, bound Sarvik firmly, and dragged him to the iron chamber,
where he bound him hand and foot with chains. A third chain he fastened
round his neck, and a fourth round his body, and drove the ends into the
walls of rock. He rolled a great stone, as large as a house, against the
door, and fixed the chains to this also, so that Sarvik could hardly
move.

The Kalevide washed the traces of the struggle away, and Sarvik tried to
obtain some concessions from him, but failing this he began to curse and
swear. The Kalevide then went to pack up a store of treasures, but was
warned by a mouse not to overload himself. So he contented himself with
taking two sacks on each shoulder, and then set out on his homeward
journey, and the iron bridge thundered beneath his footsteps, while
Sarvik shouted curses after him.

At last the Kalevide struggled up to daylight, and sank down exhausted
by the side of the son of Alev, who had been waiting anxiously for his
friend, and had heard faint sounds of conflict far below. When his
friend had fetched him some water, and he had recovered a little from
his fatigue, he asked how long he had been absent, and learned that he
had been away about three weeks. The Kalevide remarked that where he had
been there was no means of distinguishing day and night or measuring
time, and he then related his adventures.

The Alevide then slaughtered a great ox, a feat which no one else had
been able to accomplish. The blood filled a hundred vats and the flesh a
thousand barrels. They sat down to supper, and the Kalevide ate till he
was ready to burst, and then laid down to sleep, while the son of Alev
seated himself on the treasure-sacks. The Kalevide slept for two days
and nights, and did not wake till the third morning was well advanced.
While he slept, his snoring resounded for miles, and the great trees
shook as if they were saplings. About noon on the third day they set out
homeward. The son of Alev carried one sack of treasure, and the Kalevide
the other three.

After the Kalevide's return from his journey, he resided at Lindanisa,
occupying himself with schemes for the good of his people. Olev had
built three more cities, in the north, west, and south of the country.
His friends advised the Kalevide to seek a bride in Kungla, and he
replied that they would first build a beautiful fortified city and rear
a magnificent house, and then he would follow their advice.

One day the Kalevide sat at a feast with his friends, and a harper sang
the adventures of Siuru, the blue bird,[96] the daughter of Taara.

The Kalevide invited his friends to drink, and sang a song relating how
he had gone down to the beach where two trees, the apple of fortune and
the oak of wisdom, grew in the sea. Here he found some girls who told
him that his little brother had fallen into the water. He waded into the
water to look for him, and saw a naked sword at the bottom, which he was
just about to grasp, when his sister called from the shore to tell him
that his father, mother, brothers, and sisters were all dead or dying.
He hurried home, but it proved to be a hoax, for they were all alive and
well.

The son of Sulev next sang a ditty relating an adventure with four coy
maidens, and the drinking and mirth continued.

And now messengers arrived in great haste, announcing that hostile
armies of Letts, Vends, and Poles had invaded the kingdom on all sides.
But the Kalevide bade his comrades empty their cups, while he himself
quietly gave general orders, and declared that to-morrow he would take
the field in person. Then he sang a song about two lovers.

While the Kalevide was thus drinking and singing, Varrak the Laplander
entered and embraced his knees. He called down blessings from Ukko on
the hero, and then requested to receive the reward which had been
promised him, as he intended to set sail for home on the morrow. The
Kalevide asked him what he wished for; and he answered that he had found
a chained book in an iron cover, which he wished to possess.

The Kalevide could not read the book, which nevertheless contained all
the priceless wisdom which his father had recorded; and he willingly
gave it to Varrak, notwithstanding the loud protests of the sons of
Sulev and Olev. The book was fastened with three chains and three locks,
and the keys could not be found. Varrak knew very well where they were,
but he kept his knowledge to himself. So the Kalevide ordered the wall
to be broken down to release the book, which was then laid on a waggon,
and dragged by a yoke of oxen to the boat, which Varrak had already
loaded with bags of gold.[97]

Meantime a troop of fugitives came flying to the city, bringing word
that the war was close at hand, and that the axes of the youths were
useless against the swords of the mail-clad warriors.[98] The Kalevide
ordered the weary men to be fed and comfortably housed, and while they
slept he repaired to his father's grave. But there was no voice nor
counsel; there was no sound but the sighing of the wind and the moaning
of the distant sea, and the clouds shed sad tears. The hero returned
home sorrowful and uneasy.

[Footnote 96: This song will be included in a later section of the
book.]

[Footnote 97: Some of the commentators regard this book as a palladium
on which the independence of Esthonia depended; and the thoughtlessness
of the Kalevide in parting with the book which contained the wisdom of
his father as a sacrilegious action which precipitated his ruin.]

[Footnote 98: These are identified by the commentators with the Teutonic
Knights of the Sword, who conquered Esthonia in the eleventh century.]




CANTO XX

ARMAGEDDON


The news of the invasion had brought the feast to a sudden end, and the
Kalevide consulted with his friends, and proposed to bury his treasure,
thinking it might otherwise be insecure. So at dead of night the
Kalevide, Alevide, and Sulevide dug a deep pit in a secret place. Then
the Kalevide solemnly delivered over the treasure to Taara's protection,
and declared that no one should obtain it but the son of a pure mother,
who should come to the spot on St. John's Eve, and should sacrifice
three black animals without a white hair upon them--a black cock with a
curled comb, a black dog or cat, and a mole. Then he murmured secret
spells over the treasure; but the man is not yet born who shall raise
it.

When the morning dawned, the son of Kalev took his spear and sword,
mounted his war-horse, and ordered the Alevide to follow him as his
shield-bearer. Then he blew his horn, and set his forces in battle
array. The sound of the horn echoed through city and forest, and was
heard in every province of Esthonia,[99] and the people flocked to the
king at the summons. The women wept and lamented, but their husbands,
sons, brothers, and lovers went forth to the war. The Kalevide assembled
his army in the sacred oak-forest of Taara, and a bird advised him to
sharpen his sword and spear before the fight. By the fifth evening the
last stragglers had come in, and the Kalevide allowed his men two days'
longer rest. On the third day thereafter the battle began in earnest,
and the Kalevide fought against the mailed warriors for half a day, when
his horse was killed under him.

Hundreds were slain on both sides, and at last the Sulevide fell
severely wounded. The soothsayer was summoned hastily, and adjured the
blood to cease flowing:[100]

    Quickly came the man of wisdom,
    Who should charm the blood from flowing
    And should still the pain by magic.
    "Flow thou not, O blood, like water;
    Still thee, blood, of life the honey;
    Wherefore thus thy source o'erflowing,
    Breaking thus the bonds that hold thee?
    Let the blood as stone be hardened,
    Firm as oak-tree let it stiffen;
    In the stone-like veins around it,
    Let the blood be stanched, O Taara!"

But the blood continued to flow, and then the magician used stronger
spells, pressed his fingers on the wound to stop the bleeding, and tied
up the limb with red thread, afterwards applying healing herbs.

Meantime the Kalevide had routed the enemy and dispersed them over the
plain in flight, the dead being piled up in heaps behind them. But the
hero was weary and overcome with heat and thirst, and went to a lake,
which he drained to the last drop, leaving only the mud at the bottom.

Three days were given to the burial of the dead and the care of the
wounded, and then the Kalevide set out in pursuit of the enemy. Olev
built a bridge over the Võhanda according to the Kalevide's directions,
and presently the army fell in with a murderous host of Tartars, Poles,
and Letts, who were ravaging the neighbourhood of Pleskau.

Another great battle was fought, and the Kalevide slaughtered his
enemies till their bodies lay in heaps a fathom high about the field,
and the blood was five spans deep. The battle lasted for seven days, and
many notable chiefs were slain, among whom was the son of Sulev, who had
been so severely wounded in a previous battle. The Tartars and Poles had
now been slain or put to flight, and the Kalevide gathered together the
remnants of his army to attack the Vends, and ordered the Alevide to
break their centre.

The fight with the Vends lasted two days longer, and again vast numbers
were slain on both sides. A great mound was raised on the battlefield
over the grave of the Sulevide in memory of the fallen hero. The three
remaining heroes, the Kalevide, the Alevide, and Olev, stood like towers
against the attacks of the mailed warriors; but at last they were
overcome by thirst, and went to a lake in a valley, with steep high
banks, to drink. The Alevide, who was very weary, stooped down to drink,
when his foot slipped, and he fell into the water, and was drowned
before his friends could recover his body. In the bright sunshine his
huge iron helmet and his three-edged sword may still be seen gleaming at
the bottom of the water.

The Kalevide was so overcome with grief at this last misfortune that he
abandoned his kingdom, abdicating in favour of Olev, and retired to the
pine-forests on the banks of the river Koiva, where he built a cottage
and thought to dwell in peace and retirement. Here he lived alone,
supporting himself on fish and crayfish. One day a party of armed men
found their way to his hermitage, and invited him to join company with
them. He turned his back on them contemptuously, when he saw in the
water the reflection of one of them advancing with his sword drawn to
murder him.[101] He turned angrily on his foes with an indignant
exclamation, and seizing one of them by the helmet, whirled him round,
and the air sounded as if disturbed by the rush of the Northern eagle.
Then he dashed him down so that he sank to his waist in the ground. He
seized the second by the hand, and swung him round till the forest was
shaken as if by a tempest, and him he sank to the cheeks in the ground.
The third he seized in the same way, and drove him so far into the
ground that nothing could be seen of him but the hole where he had
disappeared.

Another time the Kalevide was troubled by a messenger sent by the
merchants on the coast to invite him to visit them. After listening to
his talk for some time, he told him to pull up the rod which he had
baited for crayfish, and after he had eaten, they might discuss the
matter further. The youth went down to the river bank, and found, to his
amazement, that the rod was a tall fir-tree, which the Kalevide had torn
up by the roots, but which the youth could not even move. Then the
Kalevide lifted the rod with one hand, and showed the youth that it was
baited with the whole carcass of a dead mare; and sent him about his
business, telling him to report what he had seen.

These intrusions vexed the Kalevide, and he wandered away from his
hermitage through the forests, and three days afterwards he reached Lake
Peipus, without remembering that he had ever travelled the same way
before. Singing gaily, he came to the brook Käpä, and waded in. The hero
had laid an injunction on his lost sword which he had intended to apply
to the sorcerer who had robbed him of it; but the understanding of the
sword was confused by the curse which the Finnish smith had previously
laid upon it, and it reflected that now was the time for vengeance. So
without more ado the great sword raised itself, and cut off both the
hero's legs at the knee. He cried out for help, and dragged himself with
his hands to the shore, where he lay down bleeding, his legless body
covering a whole acre of ground.

The cries of the dying Kalevide rose above the clouds and ascended to
heaven. The heavenly powers assembled round the hero, and vainly tried
to salve his wounds and soothe his pain. Presently he expired, and his
soul, like a joyful bird, took its flight to the halls of Taara in
heaven. There he sat in the firelight among the heroes of Taara, resting
his cheek on his hand, and listening to the bards as they sang of his
great deeds.

But the old father of the gods knew that so great a hero, who had
conquered all his enemies in battle, and had bound even the prince of
Põrgu in chains, could not remain idle in heaven. So he summoned all the
gods in secret conclave to consider what work they should assign to the
Kalevide, and the debate lasted for many days and nights. At last they
determined that he should keep watch and ward at the gates of Põrgu, so
that Sarvik should never be able to free himself from his bonds.

So the soul of the Kalevide flew down from heaven like a bird, and was
bidden to reanimate his body; but the might of all the gods, and even
the divine wisdom of Taara, could not put his legs on again. Then they
mounted him on a white charger,[102] and sent him to the post which had
been assigned to him at the gates of Põrgu.

When the Kalevide reached the rocky portal, a voice was heard from
heaven, "Strike the rock with thy fist!" He did so, and clove open the
rock, and his right hand was caught in the cleft. Here he sits now on
his horse at the gates of Põrgu, watching the bonds of others while
bound himself. The demons attempt unceasingly to soften their chains by
heaping up charcoal faggots around them, but when the cock crows at dawn
their fetters grow thicker again. From time to time, too, the Kalevide
struggles to free his hand from the wall of rock, till the earth
trembles and the sea foams; but the hand of Mana[103] holds him, that
the warder shall never depart from his post. But one day a vast fire
will break out on both sides of the rock and melt it, when the Kalevide
will withdraw his hand, and return to earth to inaugurate a new day of
prosperity for the Esthonians.[104]

[Footnote 99: Here we have a reminiscence of the Giallar horn of
Heimdall, and of the horn of Roland (or Orlando).]

[Footnote 100: Compare the much longer story in the 9th Runo of the
_Kalevala_.]

[Footnote 101: A similar adventure happened to the naturalist
Macgillivray in the Solomon Islands during the voyage of the _Herald_.
He turned round and shot the savage dead.]

[Footnote 102: There is a curious variant relating how the Kalevide
waded across Lake Peipus with a bridle in his hand to look for a horse,
and the water threatened to rise above his boots, when he said, "Don't
think to drown this man." Then the devil brought him first his daughter
and then his son in the shape of horses; but they both broke down under
him. Then the devil brought him his mother, in her usual shape of a
white mare, and she galloped away with the hero, and he could not rein
her in. Then a voice from heaven cried, "Godson, godson, strike your
hand into the oak!" The hero seized a great oak-tree as they were
passing, when it came away in his hand, roots and all. Then the mare
rushed to Põrgu, and the voice again bade the hero strike his hand into
the doorpost. He did so, and his hand was caught fast, and the mare
galloped away to hell from between his legs, and left him hanging
there.]

[Footnote 103: The God of Death.]

[Footnote 104: The guardian hero of every nation is looked for to return
in a similar manner; even William Tell.]


END OF THE KALEVIPOEG.
